This text is made public exclusively for information purposes. The text is the outcome of
the legal review conducted by the Canadian Government and the European Commission
and will be translated and thereafter subject to completion of the internal approval
processes in Canada and the European Union.
The text presented in this document is not binding under international law and will only
become so after the entry into force of the Agreement.
*

*

*

COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC AND TRADE AGREEMENT (CETA)
BETWEEN CANADA, OF THE ONE PART,
AND THE EUROPEAN UNION
[AND ITS MEMBER STATES,

THE KINGDOM OF BELGIUM,
THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA,
THE CZECH REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK,
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
THE REPUBLIC OF ESTONIA,
IRELAND,
THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN,
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA,
THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC,
THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS,
THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA,
1

THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA,
THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG,
HUNGARY,
THE REPUBLIC OF MALTA,
THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS,
THE REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA,
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND,
THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC,
ROMANIA,
THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA,
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC,
THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND,
THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN,
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND],
OF THE OTHER PART,
hereafter jointly referred to as the “Parties”,
resolve to:
FURTHER strengthen their close economic relationship and build upon their respective
rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, done on 15 April 1994, and other multilateral and bilateral instruments of
cooperation;
CREATE an expanded and secure market for their goods and services through the reduction
or elimination of barriers to trade and investment;
ESTABLISH clear, transparent, predictable and mutually-advantageous rules to govern their
trade and investment;
AND,
REAFFIRMING their strong attachment to democracy and to fundamental rights as laid
down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, done at Paris on 10 December 1948, and
sharing the view that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction poses a major threat to
international security;
2

RECOGNISING the importance of international security, democracy, human rights and the
rule of law for the development of international trade and economic cooperation;
RECOGNISING that the provisions of this Agreement preserve the right of the Parties to
regulate within their territories and the Parties’ flexibility to achieve legitimate policy
objectives, such as public health, safety, environment, public morals and the promotion and
protection of cultural diversity;
AFFIRMING their commitments as parties to the UNESCO Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, done at Paris on 20 October 2005,
and recognising that states have the right to preserve, develop and implement their cultural
policies, to support their cultural industries for the purpose of strengthening the diversity of
cultural expressions, and to preserve their cultural identity, including through the use of
regulatory measures and financial support;
RECOGNISING that the provisions of this Agreement protect investments and investors
with respect to their investments, and are intended to stimulate mutually-beneficial business
activity, without undermining the right of the Parties to regulate in the public interest within
their territories;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to promote sustainable development and the
development of international trade in such a way as to contribute to sustainable development
in its economic, social and environmental dimensions;
ENCOURAGING enterprises operating within their territory or subject to their jurisdiction
to respect internationally recognised guidelines and principles of corporate social
responsibility, including the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and to pursue
best practices of responsible business conduct;
IMPLEMENTING this Agreement in a manner consistent with the enforcement of their
respective labour and environmental laws and that enhances their levels of labour and
environmental protection, and building upon their international commitments on labour and
environmental matters;
RECOGNISING the strong link between innovation and trade, and the importance of
innovation to future economic growth, and affirming their commitment to encourage the
expansion of cooperation in the area of innovation, as well as the related areas of research and
development and science and technology, and to promote the involvement of relevant public
and private sector entities;
HAVE AGREED as follows:

3

CHAPTER ONE
GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND INITIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION A
General definitions
Article 1.1
Definitions of general application
For the purposes of this Agreement and unless otherwise specified:
administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or
interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall generally within its ambit
and that establishes a norm of conduct but does not include:
(a)

a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial
proceeding that applies to a particular person, good or service of the other Party
in a specific case; or

(b)

a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice;

Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture, contained in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement;
agricultural good means a product listed in Annex 1 to the Agreement on Agriculture;
Anti-dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;
CETA contact points means the contact points established under Article 26.5 (CETA contact
points);
CETA Joint Committee means the CETA Joint Committee established under Article 26.1
(The CETA Joint Committee);
CPC means the provisional Central Product Classification as set out in Statistical Office of
the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, N° 77, CPC prov, 1991;
cultural industries means persons engaged in:
(a)

the publication, distribution or sale of books, magazines, periodicals or
newspapers in print or machine-readable form, except when printing or
typesetting any of the foregoing is the only activity;

(b)

the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of film or video recordings;

(c)

the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of audio or video music
recordings;

(d)

the publication, distribution or sale of music in print or machine-readable form;
or

4

(e)

radio-communications in which the transmissions are intended for direct
reception by the general public, and all radio, television and cable broadcasting
undertakings and all satellite programming and broadcast network services;

customs duty means a duty or charge of any kind imposed on or in connection with the
importation of a good, including a form of surtax or surcharge imposed on or in connection
with that importation, but does not include:
(a)

a charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article 2.3
(National treatment);

(b)

a measure applied in accordance with the provisions of Articles VI or XIX of
the GATT 1994, the Anti-dumping Agreement, the SCM Agreement, the
Safeguards Agreement, or Article 22 of the DSU; or

(c)

a fee or other charge imposed consistently with Article VIII of the GATT
1994;

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;
days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;
DSU means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of
Disputes, contained in Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement;
enterprise means an entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether or not for
profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, including a corporation,
trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture or other association;
existing means in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, contained in Annex 1B to the
WTO Agreement;
GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, contained in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement;
goods of a Party means domestic products as these are understood in the GATT 1994 or such
goods as the Parties may decide, and includes originating goods of that Party;
Harmonized System (HS) means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes, Chapter Notes and
subheading notes;
heading means a four-digit number or the first four digits of a number used in the
nomenclature of the HS;
measure includes a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action,
requirement, practice or any other form of measure by a Party;
national means a natural person who is a citizen as defined in Article 1.2, or is a permanent
resident of a Party;
originating means qualifying under the rules of origin set out in the Protocol on Rules of
Origin and Origin Procedures;

5

person means a natural person or an enterprise;
person of a Party means a national or an enterprise of a Party;
preferential tariff treatment means the application of the duty rate under this Agreement to
an originating good pursuant to the tariff elimination schedule;
Safeguards Agreement means the Agreement on Safeguards, contained in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;
sanitary or phytosanitary measure means a measure referred to in Annex A, paragraph 1 of
the SPS Agreement;
SCM Agreement means the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures,
contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
service supplier means a person that supplies or seeks to supply a service;
SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
state enterprise means an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party;
subheading means a six-digit number or the first six digits of a number used in the
nomenclature of the HS;
tariff classification means the classification of a good or material under a chapter, heading or
subheading of the HS;
tariff elimination schedule means Annex 2-A (Tariff elimination);
TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement;
territory means the territory where this Agreement applies as set out under Article 1.3;
TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights, contained in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement;
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties means the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969;
WTO means the World Trade Organization; and
WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, done on 15 April 1994.
Article 1.2
Party-specific definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
citizen means:
(a)

for Canada, a natural person who is a citizen of Canada under Canadian legislation;

(b)

for the European Union, a natural person holding the nationality of a Member State;
and

central government means:
6

(a)

for Canada, the Government of Canada; and

(b)

for the European Union, the European Union or the national governments of its
Member States;
Article 1.3
Geographical scope of application

Unless otherwise specified, this Agreement applies:
(a)

for Canada, to:
(i)

the land territory, air space, internal waters, and territorial sea of Canada;

(ii)

the exclusive economic zone of Canada, as determined by its domestic law,
consistent with Part V of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
done at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982 (“UNCLOS”); and,

(iii) the continental shelf of Canada, as determined by its domestic law, consistent
with Part VI of UNCLOS;
(b)

for the European Union, to the territories in which the Treaty on European Union and
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union are applied and under the
conditions laid down in those Treaties. As regards the provisions concerning the
tariff treatment of goods, this Agreement shall also apply to the areas of the
European Union customs territory not covered by the first sentence of this
subparagraph.
SECTION B
Initial provisions
Article 1.4
Establishment of a free trade area

The Parties hereby establish a free trade area in conformity with Article XXIV of GATT 1994
and Article V of the GATS.
Article 1.5
Relation to the WTO Agreement and other agreements
The Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other under the WTO
Agreement and other agreements to which they are party.
Article 1.6
Reference to other agreements
When this Agreement refers to or incorporates by reference other agreements or legal
instruments in whole or in part, those references include:
(a)

related annexes, protocols, footnotes, interpretative notes and explanatory notes; and

7

(b)

successor agreements to which the Parties are party or amendments that are binding
on the Parties, except where the reference affirms existing rights.
Article 1.7
Reference to laws

When this Agreement refers to laws, either generally or by reference to a specific statute,
regulation or directive, the reference is to the laws, as they may be amended, unless otherwise
indicated.
Article 1.8
Extent of obligations
1.

Each Party is fully responsible for the observance of all provisions of this
Agreement.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that all necessary measures are taken in order to give effect
to the provisions of this Agreement, including their observance at all levels of
government.
Article 1.9
Rights and obligations relating to water

1.

The Parties recognise that water in its natural state, including water in lakes, rivers,
reservoirs, aquifers and water basins, is not a good or a product. Therefore, only
Chapters Twenty-Two (Trade and Sustainable Development) and Twenty-Four
(Trade and Environment) apply to such water.

2.

Each Party has the right to protect and preserve its natural water resources. Nothing
in this Agreement obliges a Party to permit the commercial use of water for any
purpose, including its withdrawal, extraction or diversion for export in bulk.

3.

If a Party permits the commercial use of a specific water source, it shall do so in a
manner consistent with this Agreement.
Article 1.10
Persons exercising delegated governmental authority

Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that a person that has
been delegated regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority by a Party, at any
level of government, acts in accordance with the Party’s obligations as set out under this
Agreement in the exercise of that authority.

8

CHAPTER TWO
NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS
Article 2.1
Objective
The Parties shall progressively liberalise trade in goods in accordance with the provisions of
this Agreement over a transitional period starting from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 2.2
Scope
This Chapter applies to trade in goods of a Party, as defined in Chapter 1 (General Definitions
and Initial Provisions), except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.
Article 2.3
National treatment
1.

Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in
accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994. To this end Article III of the GATT
1994 is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

2.

Paragraph 1 means, with respect to a government in Canada other than at the federal
level, or a government of or in a Member State of the European Union, treatment no
less favourable than that accorded by that government to like, directly competitive or
substitutable goods of Canada or the Member State, respectively.

3.

This Article does not apply to a measure, including a measure’s continuation, prompt
renewal or amendment, in respect of Canadian excise duties on absolute alcohol, as
listed under tariff item 2207.10.90 in Canada’s Schedule of Concessions (Schedule
V) annexed to the Marrakesh Protocol to the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, done on 15 April 1994 (the “Marrakesh Protocol”), used in manufacturing
under provisions of the Excise Act, 2001, S.C. 2002, c. 22.
Article 2.4
Reduction and elimination of customs duties on imports

1.

Each Party shall reduce or eliminate customs duties on goods originating in either
Party in accordance with the tariff elimination schedules in Annex 2-A. For the
purposes of this Chapter, “originating” means originating in either Party under the
rules of origin set out in the Protocol on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures.

2.

For each good, the base rate of customs duties to which the successive reductions
under paragraph 1 are to be applied shall be that specified in Annex 2-A.

3.

For goods that are subject to tariff preferences as listed in a Party’s tariff elimination
schedule in Annex 2-A, each Party shall apply to originating goods of the other Party
9

the lesser of the customs duties resulting from a comparison between the rate
calculated in accordance with that Party’s Schedule and its applied Most-FavouredNation (“MFN”) rate.
4.

On the request of a Party, the Parties may consult to consider accelerating and
broadening the scope of the elimination of customs duties on imports between the
Parties. A decision of the CETA Joint Committee on the acceleration or elimination
of a customs duty on a good shall supersede any duty rate or staging category
determined pursuant to the Parties’ Schedules in Annex 2-A for that good when
approved by each Party in accordance with its applicable legal procedures.
Article 2.5
Restriction on duty drawback, duty deferral and duty suspension programs

1.

Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, a Party shall not refund, defer or suspend a customs
duty paid or payable on a non-originating good imported into its territory on the
express condition that the good, or an identical, equivalent or similar substitute, is
used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported to
the territory of the other Party under preferential tariff treatment pursuant to this
Agreement.

2.

Paragraph 1 does not apply to a Party’s regime of tariff reduction, suspension or
remission, either permanent or temporary, if the reduction, suspension or remission is
not expressly conditioned on the exportation of a product.

3.

Paragraph 1 does not apply until three years after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
Article 2.6
Duties, taxes or other fees and charges on exports

A Party may not adopt or maintain any duties, taxes or other fees and charges imposed on, or
in connection with, the export of a good to the other Party, or any internal taxes or fees and
charges on a good exported to the other Party, that is in excess of those that would be imposed
on those goods when destined for internal sale.
Article 2.7
Standstill
1.

Upon the entry into force of this Agreement a Party may not increase a customs duty
existing at entry into force, or adopt a new customs duty, on a good originating in the
Parties.

2.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may:
(a)

modify a tariff outside this Agreement on a good for which no tariff preference
is claimed under this Agreement;

(b)

increase a customs duty to the level established in its Schedule in Annex 2-A
following a unilateral reduction; or

10

(c)
3.

maintain or increase a customs duty as authorised by this Agreement or any
agreement under the WTO Agreement.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, only Canada may apply a special safeguard
pursuant to Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. A special safeguard
may only be applied with respect to goods classified in items with the notation
“SSG” in Canada’s Schedule included in Annex 2-A. The use of this special
safeguard is limited to imports not subject to tariff preference and, in the case of
imports subject to a tariff rate quota, to imports over the access commitment.
Article 2.8
Temporary suspension of preferential tariff treatment

1.

2.

A Party may temporarily suspend, in accordance with paragraphs 2 through 5, the
preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement with respect to a good exported or
produced by a person of the other Party if the Party:
(a)

as a result of an investigation based on objective, compelling and verifiable
information, makes a finding that the person of the other Party has committed
systematic breaches of customs legislation in order to obtain preferential tariff
treatment under this Agreement; or

(b)

makes a finding that the other Party systematically and unjustifiably refuses to
cooperate with respect to the investigation of breaches of customs legislation
under Article 6.13.4 (Cooperation), and the Party requesting cooperation, based
on objective, compelling and verifiable information, has reasonable grounds to
conclude that the person of the other Party has committed systematic breaches
of customs legislation in order to obtain preferential tariff treatment under this
Agreement.

A Party that has made a finding referred to in paragraph 1 shall:
(a)

notify the customs authority of the other Party and provide the information and
evidence upon which the finding was based;

(b)

engage in consultations with the authorities of the other Party with a view to
achieving a mutually acceptable resolution that addresses the concerns that
resulted in the finding; and

(c)

provide written notice to that person of the other Party that includes the
information that is the basis of the finding.

3.

If the authorities have not achieved a mutually acceptable resolution after 30 days,
the Party that has made the finding shall refer the issue to the Joint Customs
Cooperation Committee.

4.

If the Joint Customs Cooperation Committee has not resolved the issue after 60 days,
the Party that has made the finding may temporarily suspend the preferential tariff
treatment under this Agreement with respect to that good of that person of the other
Party. The temporary suspension does not apply to a good that is already in transit
between the Parties on the day that the temporary suspension comes into effect.

5.

The Party applying the temporary suspension under paragraph 1 shall only apply it
for a period commensurate with the impact on the financial interests of that Party
11

resulting from the situation responsible for the finding made pursuant to paragraph 1,
to a maximum of 90 days. If the Party has reasonable grounds based on objective,
compelling and verifiable information that the conditions that gave rise to the initial
suspension have not changed after the expiry of the 90 day period, that Party may
renew the suspension for a further period of no longer than 90 days. The original
suspension and any renewed suspensions are subject to periodic consultations within
the Joint Customs Cooperation Committee.
Article 2.9
Fees and other charges
1.

In accordance with Article VIII of GATT 1994, a Party shall not adopt or maintain a
fee or charge on or in connection with importation or exportation of a good of a Party
that is not commensurate with the cost of services rendered or that represents an
indirect protection to domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal
purposes.

2.

For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not prevent a Party from imposing a customs
duty or a charge set out in paragraphs (a) through (c) of the definition of customs
duty under Article 1.1 (Definitions of general application).
Article 2.10
Goods re-entered after repair or alteration

1.

2.

1

For the purposes of this Article, repair or alteration means any processing operation
undertaken on goods to remedy operating defects or material damage and entailing
the re-establishment of goods to their original function or to ensure their compliance
with technical requirements for their use, without which the goods could no longer
be used in the normal way for the purposes for which they were intended. Repair or
alteration of goods includes restoration and maintenance but does not include an
operation or process that:
(a)

destroys the essential characteristics of a good or creates a new or
commercially different good;

(b)

transforms an unfinished good into a finished good; or

(c)

is used to substantially change the function of a good.

Except as provided in footnote 1, a Party shall not apply a customs duty to a good,
regardless of its origin, that re-enters its territory after that good has been temporarily
exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration,
regardless of whether such repair or alteration could be performed in the territory of
the Party from which the good was exported for repair or alteration.1

For the following goods of HS Chapter 89, regardless of their origin, that re-enter the territory
of Canada from the territory of the European Union, and are registered under the Canada
Shipping Act, Canada may apply to the value of repair or alteration of such goods, the rate of
customs duty for such goods in accordance with its Schedule included in Annex 2-A (Tariff
Elimination): 8901.10.10, 8901.10.90, 8901.30.00, 8901.90.10, 8901.90.91, 8901.90.99,

12

3.

Paragraph 2 does not apply to a good imported in bond, into free trade zones, or in
similar status, that is then exported for repair and is not re-imported in bond, into free
trade zones, or in similar status.

4.

A Party shall not apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, imported
temporarily from the territory of the other Party for repair or alteration.
Article 2.11
Import and export restrictions

1.

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, a Party shall not adopt or maintain
any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of the other Party or on
the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other
Party, except in accordance with Article XI of the GATT 1994. To this end Article
XI of the GATT 1994 is incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement.

2.

If a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation from or
exportation to a third country of a good, that Party may:
(a)

limit or prohibit the importation from the territory of the other Party of a good
of that third country; or

(b)

limit or prohibit the exportation of a good to that third country through the
territory of the other Party.

3.

If a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good
from a third country, the Parties, at the request of the other Party, shall enter into
discussions with a view to avoiding undue interference with or distortion of pricing,
marketing or distribution arrangements in the other Party.

4.

This Article does not apply to a measure, including that measure’s continuation,
prompt renewal or amendment, in respect of the following:
(a)

the export of logs of all species. If a Party ceases to require export permits for
logs destined for a third country, that Party will permanently cease requiring
export permits for logs destined for the other Party;

(b)

for a period of three years following the entry into force of this Agreement, the
export of unprocessed fish pursuant to Newfoundland and Labrador’s
applicable legislation;

(c)

Canadian excise duties on absolute alcohol, as listed under tariff item
2207.10.90 in Canada’s Schedule of Concessions annexed to the Marrakesh
Protocol (Schedule V), used in manufacturing under the provisions of the
Excise Act, 2001, S.C. 2002, c. 22; and

(d)

The importation of used vehicles into Canada that do not conform to Canada’s
safety and environmental requirements.

8904.00.00, 8905.20.19, 8905.20.20, 8905.90.19, 8905.90.90, 8906.90.19, 8906.90.91,
8906.90.99.

13

Article 2.12
Other provisions related to trade in goods
Each Party shall endeavour to ensure that a product of the other Party that has been imported
into and lawfully sold or offered for sale in any place in the territory of the importing Party
may also be sold or offered for sale throughout the territory of the importing Party.
Article 2.13
Committee on trade in goods
1.

The functions of the Committee on Trade in Goods established under Article 26.2.1
(a) (Committees) include:
(a)

promoting trade in goods between the Parties, including through consultations
on accelerating tariff elimination under this Agreement and other issues as
appropriate;

(b)

recommending to the CETA Joint Committee a modification of or an addition
to any provision of this Agreement related to the Harmonized System; and

(c)

promptly addressing issues related to movement of goods through the Parties’
ports of entry.

2.

The Committee on Trade in Goods may present to the CETA Joint Committee draft
decisions on the acceleration or elimination of a customs duty on a good.

3.

The Committee on Agriculture established under Article 26.2.1 (a) (Committees)
shall:

4.

(a)

meet within 90 days of a request by a Party;

(b)

provide a forum for the Parties to discuss issues related to agricultural goods
covered by this Agreement; and

(c)

refer to the Committee on Trade in Goods any unresolved issue under
subparagraph (b).

The Parties note the cooperation and exchange of information on agriculture issues
under the annual Canada-European Union Agriculture Dialogue, as established in
letters exchanged on 14 July 2008. As appropriate, the Agriculture Dialogue may be
used for the purpose of paragraph 3.

14

CHAPTER THREE
TRADE REMEDIES
SECTION A
Anti-dumping and countervailing measures
Article 3.1
General provisions concerning anti-dumping and countervailing measures
1.

The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, the
Anti-dumping Agreement and the SCM Agreement.

2.

The Protocol on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures shall not apply to
antidumping and countervailing measures.
Article 3.2
Transparency

1.

Each Party shall apply anti-dumping and countervailing measures in accordance with
the relevant WTO requirements and pursuant to a fair and transparent process.

2.

A Party shall ensure, after an imposition of provisional measures and, in any case,
before a final determination is made, full and meaningful disclosure of all essential
facts under consideration which form the basis for the decision whether to apply final
measures. This is without prejudice to Article 6.5 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement
and Article 12.4 of the SCM Agreement.

3.

Provided it does not unnecessarily delay the conduct of the investigation, each
interested party in an anti-dumping or countervailing investigation2 shall be granted a
full opportunity to defend its interests.
Article 3.3
Consideration of public interest and lesser duty

1.

Each Party’s authorities shall consider information provided in accordance with the
Party’s law as to whether imposing an anti-dumping or countervailing duty would
not be in the public interest.

2.

After considering the information referred to in paragraph 1, the Party’s authorities
may consider whether the amount of the anti-dumping or countervailing duty to be
imposed shall be the full margin of dumping or amount of subsidy or a lesser
amount, in accordance with the Party’s law.
SECTION B
Global safeguard measures

2

For the purpose of this Article, interested parties are defined as per Article 6.11 of the Anti-Dumping
Agreement and Article 12.9 of the SCM Agreement.

15

Article 3.4
General provisions concerning global safeguard measures
1.

The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations concerning global safeguard
measures under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Safeguards Agreement.

2.

The Protocol on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures shall not apply to global
safeguard measures.
Article 3.5
Transparency

1.

2.

At the request of the exporting Party, the Party initiating a safeguard investigation or
intending to adopt provisional or definitive global safeguard measures shall
immediately provide:
(a)

the information referred to in Article 12.2 of the Safeguards Agreement, in the
format prescribed by the WTO Committee on Safeguards;

(b)

the public version of the complaint filed by the domestic industry, where
relevant; and

(c)

a public report setting forth the findings and reasoned conclusions on all
pertinent issues of fact and law considered in the safeguard investigation. The
public report shall include an analysis that attributes injury to the factors
causing it and set out the method used in defining the global safeguard
measures.

When information is provided under this Article, the importing Party shall offer to
hold consultations with the exporting Party in order to review the information
provided.
Article 3.6
Imposition of definitive measures

1.

A Party adopting global safeguard measures shall endeavour to impose them in a
way that least affects bilateral trade.

2.

The importing Party shall offer to hold consultations with the exporting Party in
order to review the matter referred to in paragraph 1. The importing Party shall not
adopt measures until 30 days have elapsed since the date the offer to hold
consultations was made.
SECTION C
General provisions
Article 3.7

Exclusion from dispute settlement
This Chapter is not subject to Chapter Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement).

16

CHAPTER FOUR
TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE
Article 4.1
Scope and definitions
1.

This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption, and application of technical
regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures that may affect trade in
goods between the Parties.

2.

This Chapter does not apply to:
(a)

purchasing specifications prepared by a governmental body for production or
consumption requirements of governmental bodies; or

(b)

a sanitary or phytosanitary measure as defined in Annex A of the SPS
Agreement.

3.

Except where this Agreement, including the incorporated provisions of the TBT
Agreement pursuant to Article 4.2, defines or gives a meaning to a term, the general
terms for standardisation and conformity assessment procedures shall normally have
the meaning given to them by the definition adopted within the United Nations
system and by international standardising bodies taking into account their context
and in the light of the object and purpose of this Chapter.

4.

References in this Chapter to technical regulations, standards, and conformity
assessment procedures include amendments thereto, and additions to the rules or the
product coverage thereof, except amendments and additions of an insignificant
nature.

5.

Article 1.8.2 (Extent of obligations) does not apply to Articles 3, 4, 7, 8 and 9 of the
TBT Agreement, as incorporated into this Agreement.
Article 4.2
Incorporation of the TBT Agreement

1.

The following provisions of the TBT Agreement are hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement:
(a)

Article 2 (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations by
Central Government Bodies);

(b)

Article 3 (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Technical Regulations by
Local Government Bodies and Non-Governmental Bodies);

(c)

Article 4 (Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards);

(d)

Article 5 (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity by Central Government
Bodies);

17

(e)

Article 6 (Recognition of Conformity Assessment by Central Government
Bodies), without limiting a Party’s rights or obligations under the Protocol on
the Mutual Acceptance of the Results of Conformity Assessment, and the
Protocol on the Mutual Recognition of the Compliance and Enforcement
Programme Regarding Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical
Products;

(f)

Article 7 (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity by Local Government
Bodies);

(g)

Article 8 (Procedures for Assessment of Conformity by Non-Governmental
Bodies);

(h)

Article 9 (International and Regional Systems);

(i)

Annex 1 (Terms and their Definitions for the Purpose of this Agreement); and

(j)

Annex 3 (Code of Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application
of Standards).

2.

The term “Members” in the incorporated provisions shall have the same meaning in
this Agreement as it has in the TBT Agreement.

3.

With respect to Articles 3, 4, 7, 8 and 9 of the TBT Agreement, Chapter TwentyNine (Dispute Settlement) can be invoked in cases where a Party considers that the
other Party has not achieved satisfactory results under these Articles and its trade
interests are significantly affected. In this respect, such results shall be equivalent to
those as if the body in question were a Party.
Article 4.3
Cooperation

The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the areas of technical regulations, standards,
metrology, conformity assessment procedures, market surveillance or monitoring and
enforcement activities in order to facilitate trade between the Parties, as set out in Chapter
Twenty-One (Regulatory Cooperation). This may include promoting and encouraging
cooperation between the Parties’ respective public or private organisations responsible for
metrology, standardisation, testing, certification and accreditation, market surveillance or
monitoring and enforcement activities; and, in particular, encouraging their accreditation and
conformity assessment bodies to participate in cooperation arrangements that promote the
acceptance of conformity assessment results.
Article 4.4
Technical regulations
1.

The Parties undertake to cooperate to the extent possible, to ensure that their
technical regulations are compatible with one another. To this end, if a Party
expresses an interest in developing a technical regulation equivalent or similar in
scope to one that exists in or is being prepared by the other Party, that other Party
shall, on request, provide to the Party, to the extent practicable, the relevant
information, studies and data upon which it has relied in the preparation of its
technical regulation, whether adopted or being developed. The Parties recognise that
18

it may be necessary to clarify and agree on the scope of a specific request, and that
confidential information may be withheld.
2.

A Party that has prepared a technical regulation that it considers to be equivalent to a
technical regulation of the other Party having compatible objective and product scope
may request that the other Party recognise the technical regulation as equivalent. The
Party shall make the request in writing and set out detailed reasons why the technical
regulation should be considered equivalent, including reasons with respect to product
scope. The Party that does not agree that the technical regulation is equivalent shall
provide to the other Party, upon request, the reasons for its decision.
Article 4.5
Conformity assessment

The Parties shall observe the Protocol on the mutual acceptance of the results of conformity
assessment, and the Protocol on the mutual recognition of the compliance and enforcement
programme regarding good manufacturing practices for pharmaceutical products.
Article 4.6
Transparency
1.

Each Party shall ensure that transparency procedures regarding the development of
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures allow interested persons
of the Parties to participate at an early appropriate stage when amendments can still
be introduced and comments taken into account, except where urgent problems of
safety, health, environmental protection or national security arise or threaten to arise.
Where a consultation process regarding the development of technical regulations or
conformity assessment procedures is open to the public, each Party shall permit
persons of the other Party to participate on terms no less favourable than those
accorded to its own persons.

2.

The Parties shall promote closer cooperation between the standardisation bodies
located within their respective territories with a view to facilitating, among other
things, the exchange of information about their respective activities, as well as the
harmonisation of standards based on mutual interest and reciprocity, according to
modalities to be agreed by the standardisation bodies concerned.

3.

Each Party shall endeavour to allow a period of at least 60 days following its
transmission to the WTO Central Registry of Notifications of proposed technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures for the other Party to provide
written comments, except where urgent problems of safety, health, environmental
protection or national security arise or threaten to arise. A Party shall give positive
consideration to a reasonable request to extend the comment period.

4.

If a Party receives comments on its proposed technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure from the other Party, it shall reply in writing to those
comments before the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is
adopted.

5.

Each Party shall publish or otherwise make publicly available, in print or
electronically, its responses or a summary of its responses, to significant comments it
19

receives, no later than the date it publishes the adopted technical regulation or
conformity assessment procedure.
6.

Each Party shall, upon request of the other Party, provide information regarding the
objectives of, legal basis and rationale for, a technical regulation or conformity
assessment procedure, that the Party has adopted or is proposing to adopt.

7.

A Party shall give positive consideration to a reasonable request from the other Party,
received prior to the end of the comment period following the transmission of a
proposed technical regulation, to establish or extend the period of time between the
adoption of the technical regulation and the day upon which it is applicable, except
where the delay would be ineffective in fulfilling the legitimate objectives pursued.

8.

Each Party shall ensure that its adopted technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures are publicly available on official websites.

9.

If a Party detains at a port of entry a good imported from the territory of the other
Party on the grounds that the good has failed to comply with a technical regulation, it
shall, without undue delay, notify the importer of the reasons for the detention of the
good.
Article 4.7
Management of the Chapter

1.

The Parties shall cooperate on issues covered by this Chapter. The Parties agree that
the Committee on Trade in Goods, established under Article 26.2.1(a) shall:
(a)

manage the implementation of this Chapter;

(b)

promptly address an issue that a Party raises related to the development,
adoption or application of standards, technical regulations or conformity
assessment procedures;

(c)

on a Party’s request, facilitate discussion of the assessment of risk or hazard
conducted by the other Party;

(d)

encourage cooperation between the standardisation bodies and conformity
assessment bodies of the Parties;

(e)

exchange information on standards, technical regulations, or conformity
assessment procedures including those of third parties or international bodies
where there is a mutual interest in doing so;

(f)

review this Chapter in the light of developments before the WTO Committee
on Technical Barriers to Trade or under the TBT Agreement, and, if necessary,
develop recommendations to amend this Chapter for consideration by the
CETA Joint Committee;

(g)

take other steps that the Parties consider will assist them to implement this
Chapter and the TBT Agreement and to facilitate trade between the Parties; and

(h)

report to the CETA Joint Committee on the implementation of this Chapter, as
appropriate.

20

2.

If the Parties are unable to resolve a matter covered under this Chapter through the
Committee on Trade in Goods, upon request of a Party, the CETA Joint Committee
may establish an ad hoc technical working group to identify solutions to facilitate
trade. If a Party does not agree with a request from the other Party to establish a
technical working group, it shall, on request, explain the reasons for its decision. The
Parties shall lead the technical working group.

3.

When a Party has requested information, the other Party shall provide the
information, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, in print or electronically
within a reasonable period of time. The Party shall endeavour to respond to each
request for information within 60 days.

21

CHAPTER FIVE
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
Article 5.1
Definitions
1.

2.

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
(a)

the definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement;

(b)

the definitions adopted under the auspices of the Codex Alimentarius
Commission (the “Codex”);

(c)

the definitions adopted under the auspices of the World Organisation for
Animal Health (the “OIE”);

(d)

the definitions adopted under the auspices of the International Plant Protection
Convention (the “IPPC”);

(e)

protected zone for a specified regulated harmful organism means an officially
defined geographical area in the European Union in which that organism is not
established in spite of favourable conditions for its establishment and its
presence in other parts of the European Union; and

(f)

a competent authority of a Party means an authority listed in Annex 5-A.

Further to paragraph 1, the definitions under the SPS Agreement prevail to the extent
that there is an inconsistency between the definitions adopted under the auspices of
the Codex, the OIE, the IPPC and the definitions under the SPS Agreement.
Article 5.2
Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a)

protect human, animal and plant life or health while facilitating trade;

(b)

ensure that the Parties’ sanitary and phytosanitary (“SPS”) measures do not create
unjustified barriers to trade; and

(c)

further the implementation of the SPS Agreement.
Article 5.3
Scope

This Chapter applies to SPS measures that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the
Parties.
Article 5.4
Rights and obligations
The Parties affirm their rights and obligations under the SPS Agreement.
22

Article 5.5
Adaptation to regional conditions
1.

2.

With respect to an animal, animal product and animal by-product:
(a)

the Parties recognise the concept of zoning and they have decided to apply this
concept to the diseases listed in Annex 5-B;

(b)

if the Parties decide on principles and guidelines to recognise regional
conditions, they shall include them in Annex 5-C;

(c)

for the purpose of sub-paragraph (a), the importing Party shall base its sanitary
measure applicable to the exporting Party whose territory is affected by a
disease listed in Annex 5-B on the zoning decision made by the exporting
Party, provided that the importing Party is satisfied that the exporting Party’s
zoning decision is in accordance with the principles and guidelines that the
Parties set out in Annex 5-C, and is based on relevant international standards,
guidelines, and recommendations. The importing Party may apply any
additional measure to achieve its appropriate level of sanitary protection;

(d)

if a Party considers that it has a special status with respect to a disease not
listed in Annex 5-B, it may request recognition of that status. The importing
Party may request additional guarantees for imports of live animals, animal
products, and animal by-products appropriate to the agreed status recognised
by the importing Party, including the special conditions identified in Annex 5E; and

(e)

the Parties recognise the concept of compartmentalisation and agree to
cooperate on this matter.

With respect to a plant and plant product:
(a)

when the importing Party establishes or maintains its phytosanitary measure, it
shall take into account, among other things, the pest status of an area, such as a
pest-free area, pest-free place of production, pest-free production site, an area
of low pest prevalence and a protected zone that the exporting Party has
established; and

(b)

if the Parties decide on principles and guidelines to recognise regional
conditions, they shall include them in Annex 5-C.
Article 5.6
Equivalence

1.

The importing Party shall accept the SPS measure of the exporting Party as
equivalent to its own if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates to the importing
Party that its measure achieves the importing Party’s appropriate level of SPS
protection.

2.

Annex 5-D sets out principles and guidelines to determine, recognise, and maintain
equivalence.

3.

Annex 5-E sets out:

23

4.

(a)

the area for which the importing Party recognises that an SPS measure of the
exporting Party is equivalent to its own; and

(b)

the area for which the importing Party recognises that the fulfilment of the
specified special condition, combined with the exporting Party’s SPS measure,
achieves the importing Party’s appropriate level of SPS protection.

For the purposes of this Chapter, Article 1.7 (Reference to laws) applies subject to
this Article, Annex 5-D and the General Notes under Annex 5-E.
Article 5.7
Trade conditions

1.

The importing Party shall make available its general SPS import requirements for all
commodities. If the Parties jointly identify a commodity as a priority, the importing
Party shall establish specific SPS import requirements for that commodity, unless the
Parties decide otherwise. In identifying which commodities are priorities, the Parties
shall cooperate to ensure the efficient management of their available resources. The
specific import requirements should be applicable to the total territory of the
exporting Party.

2.

Pursuant to paragraph 1, the importing Party shall undertake, without undue delay,
the necessary process to establish specific SPS import requirements for the
commodity that is identified as a priority. Once these specific import requirements
are established, the importing Party shall take the necessary steps, without undue
delay, to allow trade on the basis of these import requirements.

3.

For the purpose of establishing the specific SPS import requirements, the exporting
Party shall, at the request of the importing Party:

4.

(a)

provide all relevant information required by the importing Party; and

(b)

give reasonable access to the importing Party to inspect, test, audit and perform
other relevant procedures.

If the importing Party maintains a list of authorised establishments or facilities for
the import of a commodity, it shall approve an establishment or facility situated in
the territory of the exporting Party without prior inspection of that establishment or
facility if:
(a)

the exporting Party has requested such an approval for the establishment or
facility, accompanied by the appropriate guarantees; and

(b)

the conditions and procedures set out in Annex 5-F are fulfilled.

5.

Further to paragraph 4, the importing Party shall make its lists of authorised
establishments or facilities publicly available.

6.

A Party shall normally accept a consignment of a regulated commodity without preclearance of the commodity on a consignment basis, unless the Parties decide
otherwise.

7.

The importing Party may require that the relevant competent authority of the
exporting Party objectively demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the importing Party,
that the import requirements may be fulfilled or are fulfilled.
24

8.

The Parties should follow the procedure set out in Annex 5-G on the specific import
requirements for plant health.
Article 5.8
Audit and verification

1.

For the purpose of maintaining confidence in the implementation of this Chapter, a
Party may carry out an audit or verification, or both, of all or part of the control
programme of the competent authority of the other Party. A Party shall bear its own
costs associated with the audit or verification.

2.

If the Parties decide on principles and guidelines to conduct an audit or verification,
they shall include them in Annex 5-H. If a Party conducts an audit or verification, it
shall do so in accordance with any principles and guidelines in Annex 5-H.
Article 5.9
Export certification

1.

When an official health certificate is required to import a consignment of live
animals or animal products, and if the importing Party has accepted the SPS measure
of the exporting Party as equivalent to its own with respect to such animals or animal
products, the Parties shall use the model health attestation prescribed in Annex 5-I
for such certificate, unless the Parties decide otherwise. The Parties may also use a
model attestation for other products if they so decide.

2.

Annex 5-I sets out principles and guidelines for export certification, including
electronic certification, withdrawal or replacement of certificates, language regimes
and model attestations.
Article 5.10
Import checks and fees

1.

Annex 5-J sets out principles and guidelines for import checks and fees, including
the frequency rate for import checks.

2.

If import checks reveal non-compliance with the relevant import requirements, the
action taken by the importing Party must be based on an assessment of the risk
involved and not be more trade-restrictive than required to achieve the Party’s
appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection.

3.

Whenever possible, the importing Party shall notify the importer of a non-compliant
consignment, or its representative, of the reason for non-compliance, and provide
them with an opportunity for a review of the decision. The importing Party shall
consider any relevant information submitted to assist in the review.

4.

A Party may collect fees for the costs incurred to conduct frontier checks, which
should not exceed the recovery of the costs.
Article 5.11
Notification and information exchange
25

1.

2.

3.

A Party shall notify the other Party without undue delay of a:
(a)

significant change to pest or disease status, such as the presence and evolution
of a disease listed in Annex 5-B;

(b)

finding of epidemiological importance with respect to an animal disease, which
is not listed in Annex 5-B, or which is a new disease; and

(c)

significant food safety issue related to a product traded between the Parties.

The Parties endeavour to exchange information on other relevant issues including:
(a)

a change to a Party’s SPS measure;

(b)

any significant change to the structure or organisation of a Party’s competent
authority;

(c)

on request, the results of a Party’s official control and a report that concerns the
results of the control carried out;

(d)

the results of an import check provided for in Article 5.10 in case of a rejected
or a non-compliant consignment; and

(e)

on request, a risk analysis or scientific opinion that a Party has produced and
that is relevant to this Chapter.

Unless the Joint Management Committee decides otherwise, when the information
referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 has been made available via notification to the WTO’s
Central Registry of Notifications or to the relevant international standard-setting
body, in accordance with its relevant rules, the requirements in paragraphs 1 and 2,
as they apply to that information, are fulfilled.
Article 5.12
Technical consultations

If a Party has a significant concern with respect to food safety, plant health, or animal health,
or an SPS measure that the other Party has proposed or implemented, that Party may request
technical consultations with the other Party. The Party that is the subject of the request should
respond to the request without undue delay. Each Party shall endeavour to provide the
information necessary to avoid a disruption to trade and, as the case may be, to reach a
mutually acceptable solution.
Article 5.13
Emergency SPS measures
1.

A Party shall notify the other Party of an emergency SPS measure within 24 hours of
its decision to implement the measure. If a Party requests technical consultations to
address the emergency SPS measure, the technical consultations must be held within
10 days of the notification of the emergency SPS measure. The Parties shall consider
any information provided through the technical consultations.

2.

The importing Party shall consider the information that was provided in a timely
manner by the exporting Party when it makes its decision with respect to a

26

consignment that, at the time of adoption of the emergency SPS measure, is being
transported between the Parties.
Article 5.14
Joint Management Committee for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1.

The Joint Management Committee for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (the
“Joint Management Committee”), established under Article 26.2.1(d), comprises
regulatory and trade representatives of each Party responsible for SPS measures.

2.

The functions of the Joint Management Committee include:

3.

(a)

to monitor the implementation of this Chapter, to consider any matter related to
this Chapter and to examine all matters which may arise in relation to its
implementation;

(b)

to provide direction for the identification, prioritisation, management and
resolution of issues;

(c)

to address any request by a Party to modify an import check;

(d)

at least once a year, to review the annexes to this Chapter, notably in the light
of progress made under the consultations provided for under this Agreement.
Following its review, the Joint Management Committee may decide to amend
the annexes to this Chapter. The Parties may approve the Joint Management
Committee’s decision, in accordance with their respective procedures
necessary for the entry into force of the amendment. The decision enters into
force on a date agreed by the Parties;

(e)

to monitor the implementation of a decision referred to in subparagraph (d),
above, as well as the operation of measures referred to under subparagraph (d)
above;

(f)

to provide a regular forum to exchange information that relates to each Party’s
regulatory system, including the scientific and risk assessment basis for an SPS
measure; and

(g)

to prepare and maintain a document that details the state of discussions
between the Parties on their work on recognition of the equivalence of specific
SPS measures.

The Joint Management Committee may, among other things:
(a)

identify opportunities for greater bilateral engagement, including enhanced
relationships, which may include an exchange of officials;

(b)

discuss at an early stage, a change to, or a proposed change to, an SPS measure
being considered;

(c)

facilitate improved understanding between the Parties on the implementation of
the SPS Agreement, and promote cooperation between the Parties on SPS
issues under discussion in multilateral fora, including the WTO Committee on
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and international standard-setting bodies,
as appropriate; or

27

(d)

identify and discuss, at an early stage, initiatives that have an SPS component,
and that would benefit from cooperation.

4.

The Joint Management Committee may establish working groups comprising expertlevel representatives of the Parties, to address specific SPS issues.

5.

A Party may refer any SPS issue to the Joint Management Committee. The Joint
Management Committee should consider the issue as expeditiously as possible.

6.

If the Joint Management Committee is unable to resolve an issue expeditiously, it
shall, at the request of a Party, report promptly to the CETA Joint Committee.

7.

Unless the Parties decide otherwise, the Joint Management Committee shall meet
and establish its work programme no later than 180 days following the entry into
force of this Agreement, and its rules of procedure no later than one year after the
entry into force of this Agreement.

8.

Following its initial meeting, the Joint Management Committee shall meet as
required, normally on an annual basis. The Joint Management Committee may
decide to meet by videoconference or teleconference, and it may also address issues
out of session by correspondence.

9.

The Joint Management Committee shall report annually on its activities and work
programme to the CETA Joint Committee.

10.

Upon entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall designate and inform the
other Party, in writing, of a contact point to coordinate the Joint Management
Committee’s agenda and to facilitate communication on SPS matters.

28

CHAPTER SIX
CUSTOMS AND TRADE FACILITATION
Article 6.1
Objectives and principles
1.

The Parties acknowledge the importance of customs and trade facilitation matters in
the evolving global trading environment.

2.

The Parties shall, to the extent possible, cooperate and exchange information,
including information on best practices, to promote the application of and
compliance with the trade facilitation measures in this Agreement.

3.

Measures to facilitate trade shall not hinder mechanisms to protect a person through
effective enforcement of and compliance with a Party’s law.

4.

Import, export and transit requirements and procedures shall be no more
administratively burdensome or trade restrictive than necessary to achieve a
legitimate objective.

5.

Existing international trade and customs instruments and standards shall be the basis
for import, export and transit requirements and procedures, except if these
instruments and standards would be an inappropriate or ineffective means for the
fulfilment of the legitimate objective pursued.
Article 6.2
Transparency

1.

Each Party shall publish or otherwise make available, including through electronic
means, its legislation, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative policies
relating to requirements for the import or export of goods.

2.

Each Party shall endeavour to make public, including on the internet, proposed
regulations and administrative policies relating to customs matters and to provide
interested persons an opportunity to comment prior to their adoption.

3.

Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more contact points to address
inquiries by interested persons concerning customs matters and make available on
the internet information concerning the procedures for making such inquiries.
Article 6.3
Release of goods

1.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient
release of goods in order to facilitate trade between the Parties and reduce costs for
importers and exporters.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that these simplified procedures:
(a)

allow for the release of goods within a period of time no longer than that
required to ensure compliance with its law;
29

(b)

allow goods, and to the extent possible controlled or regulated goods, to be
released at the first point of arrival;

(c)

endeavour to allow for the expeditious release of goods in need of emergency
clearance;

(d)

allow an importer or its agent to remove goods from customs’ control prior to
the final determination and payment of customs duties, taxes, and fees. Before
releasing the goods, a Party may require that an importer provide sufficient
guarantee in the form of a surety, a deposit, or some other appropriate
instrument; and

(e)

provide for, in accordance with its law, simplified documentation requirements
for the entry of low-value goods as determined by each Party.

3.

Each Party, in its simplified procedures, may require the submission of more
extensive information through post-entry accounting and verifications, as
appropriate.

4.

Each Party shall allow for the expedited release of goods and, to the extent possible
and if applicable, shall:
(a)

provide for advance electronic submission and processing of information
before physical arrival of goods to enable their release upon arrival, if no risk
has been identified or if no random checks are to be performed; and

(b)

provide for clearance of certain goods with a minimum of documentation.

5.

Each Party shall, to the extent possible, ensure that its authorities and agencies
involved in border and other import and export controls cooperate and coordinate to
facilitate trade by, among other things, converging import and export data and
documentation requirements and establishing a single location for one-time
documentary and physical verification of consignments.

6.

Each Party shall ensure, to the extent possible, that its import and export
requirements for goods are coordinated to facilitate trade, regardless of whether these
requirements are administered by an agency or on behalf of that agency by the
customs administration.
Article 6.4
Customs valuation

1.

The Customs Valuation Agreement governs customs valuation applied to reciprocal
trade between the Parties.

2.

The Parties shall cooperate with a view to reaching a common approach to issues
relating to customs valuation.
Article 6.5
Classification of goods

The classification of goods in trade between the Parties under this Agreement is set out in
each Party’s respective tariff nomenclature in conformity with the Harmonized System.

30

Article 6.6
Fees and charges
Each Party shall publish or otherwise make available information on fees and charges
imposed by a customs administration of that Party, including through electronic means. This
information includes the applicable fees and charges, the specific reason for the fee or charge,
the responsible authority, and when and how payment is to be made. A Party shall not impose
new or amended fees and charges until it publishes or otherwise makes available this
information.
Article 6.7
Risk management
1.

Each Party shall base its examination, release and post-entry verification procedures
on risk assessment principles, rather than requiring each shipment offered for entry to
be examined in a comprehensive manner for compliance with import requirements.

2.

Each Party shall adopt and apply its import, export and transit requirements and
procedures for goods on the basis of risk management principles and focus
compliance measures on transactions that merit attention.

3.

Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not preclude a Party from conducting quality control and
compliance reviews that can require more extensive examinations.
Article 6.8
Automation

1.

Each Party shall use information technologies that expedite its procedures for the
release of goods in order to facilitate trade, including trade between the Parties.

2.

Each Party shall:

3.

4.

(a)

endeavour to make available by electronic means customs forms that are
required for the import or export of goods;

(b)

allow, subject to its law, those customs forms to be submitted in electronic
format; and

(c)

if possible, through its customs administration, provide for the electronic
exchange of information with its trading community.

Each Party shall endeavour to:
(a)

develop or maintain fully interconnected single window systems to facilitate a
single, electronic submission of the information required by customs and noncustoms legislation for cross-border movements of goods; and

(b)

develop a set of data elements and processes in accordance with the World
Customs Organization (“WCO”) Data Model and related WCO
recommendations and guidelines.

The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate on the development of interoperable
electronic systems, including taking account of the work at the WCO, in order to
facilitate trade between the Parties.
31

Article 6.9
Advance rulings
1.

Each Party shall issue, upon written request, advance rulings on tariff classification
in accordance with its law.

2.

Subject to confidentiality requirements, each Party shall publish, for example on the
internet, information on advance rulings on tariff classification that is relevant to
understand and apply tariff classification rules.

3.

To facilitate trade, the Parties shall include in their bilateral dialogue regular updates
on changes in their respective laws and implementation measures regarding matters
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
Article 6.10
Review and appeal

1.

Each Party shall ensure that an administrative action or official decision taken in
respect of the import of goods is reviewable promptly by judicial, arbitral, or
administrative tribunals or through administrative procedures.

2.

The tribunal or official acting pursuant to those administrative procedures shall be
independent of the official or office issuing the decision and shall have the
competence to maintain, modify or reverse the determination in accordance with the
Party’s law.

3.

Before requiring a person to seek redress at a more formal or judicial level, each
Party shall provide for an administrative level of appeal or review that is independent
of the official or the office responsible for the original action or decision.

4.

Each Party shall grant substantially the same right of review and appeal of
determinations of advance rulings by its customs administration that it provides to
importers in its territory to a person that has received an advance ruling pursuant to
Article 6.9.
Article 6.11
Penalties

Each Party shall ensure that its customs law provides that penalties imposed for breaches to it
be proportionate and non-discriminatory and that the application of these penalties does not
result in unwarranted delays.
Article 6.12
Confidentiality
1.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its law, treat as strictly confidential all
information obtained under this Chapter that is by its nature confidential or that is
provided on a confidential basis, and shall protect that information from disclosure
that could prejudice the competitive position of the person providing the information.

32

2.

If the Party receiving or obtaining the information referred to in paragraph 1 is
required by its law to disclose the information, that Party shall notify the Party or
person who provided that information.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that the confidential information collected under this Chapter
shall not be used for purposes other than the administration and enforcement of
customs matters, except with the permission of the Party or person that provided that
confidential information.

4.

A Party may allow information collected under this Chapter to be used in
administrative, judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings instituted for failure to comply
with customs-related laws implementing this Chapter. A Party shall notify the Party
or person that provided the information in advance of such use.
Article 6.13
Cooperation

1.

The Parties shall continue to cooperate in international fora, such as the WCO, to
achieve mutually-recognised goals, including those set out in the WCO Framework
of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade.

2.

The Parties shall regularly review relevant international initiatives on trade
facilitation, including the Compendium of Trade Facilitation Recommendations
developed by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, to identify areas where further
joint action would facilitate trade between the Parties and promote shared
multilateral objectives.

3.

The Parties shall cooperate in accordance with the Agreement between Canada and
the European Community on Customs Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in
Customs Matters, done at Ottawa on 4 December 1997 (the “Canada-EU Customs
Cooperation Agreement”).

4.

The Parties shall provide each other with mutual assistance in customs matters in
accordance with the Canada-EU Customs Cooperation Agreement, including matters
relating to a suspected breach of a Party’s customs legislation, as defined in that
agreement, and to the implementation of this Agreement.
Article 6.14
Joint Customs Cooperation Committee

1.

The Joint Customs Cooperation Committee, which is granted authority to act under
the auspices of the CETA Joint Committee as a specialised committee pursuant to
Article 26.2.1 (c) (Specialised committees), shall ensure the proper functioning of
this Chapter and the Protocol on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures, as well as
Article 20.43 (Scope of border measures) and Article 2.8 (Temporary suspension of
preferential tariff treatment). The Joint Customs Cooperation Committee shall
examine issues arising from their application in accordance with the objectives of
this Agreement.

33

2.

For matters covered by this Agreement, the Joint Customs Cooperation Committee
shall comprise representatives of the customs, trade, or other competent authorities as
each Party deems appropriate.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that its representatives in Joint Customs Cooperation
Committee meetings have an expertise that corresponds to the agenda items. The
Joint Customs Cooperation Committee may meet in a specific configuration of
expertise to deal with rules of origin or origin procedures matters either as the Joint
Customs Cooperation Committee-Rules of Origin or the Joint Customs Cooperation
Committee-Origin Procedures.

4.

The Joint Customs Cooperation Committee may formulate resolutions,
recommendations, or opinions and present draft decisions to the CETA Joint
Committee that it considers necessary for the attainment of the common objectives
and sound functioning of the mechanisms established in this Chapter and the
Protocol on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures, as well as Article 20.43 (Scope
of border measures) and Article 2.8 (Temporary suspension of preferential tariff
treatment).

34

CHAPTER SEVEN
SUBSIDIES
Article 7.1
Definition of a subsidy
1.

For the purposes of this Agreement, a subsidy means a measure related to trade in
goods, which fulfils the conditions set out in Article 1.1 of the SCM Agreement.

2.

A subsidy is subject to this Chapter only if it is specific within the meaning of Article
2 of the SCM Agreement.
Article 7.2
Transparency

1.

Every two years, each Party shall notify the other Party of the following with respect
to any subsidy granted or maintained within its territory:
(a)

the legal basis of the subsidy;

(b)

the form of the subsidy; and

(c)

the amount of the subsidy or the amount budgeted for the subsidy.

2.

Notifications provided to the WTO under Article 25.1 of the SCM Agreement are
deemed to meet the requirement set out in paragraph 1.

3.

At the request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide information and
respond to questions pertaining to particular instances of government support related
to trade in services provided within its territory.
Article 7.3
Consultations on subsidies and government support in sectors other than agriculture
and fisheries

1.

If a Party considers that a subsidy, or a particular instance of government support
related to trade in services, granted by the other Party is adversely affecting, or may
adversely affect its interests, it may express its concerns to the other Party and
request consultations on the matter. The responding Party shall accord full and
sympathetic consideration to that request.

2.

During consultations, a Party may seek additional information on a subsidy or
particular instance of government support related to trade in services provided by the
other Party, including its policy objective, its amount, and any measures taken to
limit the potential distortive effect on trade.

3.

On the basis of the consultations, the responding Party shall endeavour to eliminate
or minimise any adverse effects of the subsidy, or the particular instance of
government support related to trade in services, on the requesting Party's interests.

35

4.

This Article does not apply to subsidies related to agricultural goods and fisheries
products, and is without prejudice to Articles 7.4 and 7.5.
Article 7.4
Consultations on subsidies related to agricultural
goods and fisheries products

1.

The Parties share the objective of working jointly to reach an agreement:
(a)

to further enhance multilateral disciplines and rules on agricultural trade in the
WTO; and

(b)

to help develop a global, multilateral resolution to fisheries subsidies.

2.

If a Party considers that a subsidy, or the provision of government support, granted
by the other Party, is adversely affecting, or may adversely affect, its interests with
respect to agricultural goods or fisheries products, it may express its concerns to the
other Party and request consultations on the matter.

3.

The responding Party shall accord full and sympathetic consideration to that request
and will use its best endeavours to eliminate or minimise the adverse effects of the
subsidy, or the provision of government support, on the requesting Party's interests
with regard to agricultural goods and fisheries products.
Article 7.5
Agriculture export subsidies

1.

2.

For the purposes of this Article:
(a)

export subsidy means an export subsidy as defined in Article 1(e) of the
Agreement on Agriculture; and

(b)

full elimination of a tariff means, where tariff quotas exist, the elimination of
either the in-quota or over-quota tariff.

A Party shall not adopt or maintain an export subsidy on an agricultural good that is
exported, or incorporated in a product that is exported, to the territory of the other
Party after the other Party has fully eliminated the tariff, immediately or after the
transitional period, on that agricultural good in accordance with Annex 2-A (Tariff
Elimination), including its Tariff Schedules.
Article 7.6
Confidentiality

When providing information under this Chapter, a Party is not required to disclose
confidential information.
Article 7.7
Exclusion of subsidies and government support for audio-visual services and cultural
industries

36

Nothing in this Agreement applies to subsidies or government support with respect to audiovisual services for the European Union and to cultural industries for Canada.
Article 7.8
Relationship with the WTO Agreement
The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, the SCM
Agreement and the Agreement on Agriculture.
Article 7.9
Dispute settlement
Articles 7.3 and 7.4 of this Chapter are not subject to the dispute settlement provisions of this
Agreement.

37

CHAPTER EIGHT
INVESTMENT
SECTION A
Definitions and scope
Article 8.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
activities carried out in the exercise of governmental authority means activities carried out
neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more economic operators;
aircraft repair and maintenance services means activities undertaken on an aircraft or a
part of an aircraft while it is withdrawn from service and do not include so-called line
maintenance;
airport operation services means the operation or management, on a fee or contract basis, of
airport infrastructure, including terminals, runways, taxiways and aprons, parking facilities,
and intra-airport transportation systems. For greater certainty, airport operation services do
not include the ownership of, or investment in, airports or airport lands, or any of the
functions carried out by a board of directors. Airport operation services do not include air
navigation services;
attachment means the seizure of property of a disputing party to secure or ensure the
satisfaction of an award;
computer reservation system services means the supply of a service by computerised
systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and fare
rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;
confidential or protected information means:
(a)

confidential business information; or

(b)

information which is protected against disclosure to the public;
(i)

in the case of information of the respondent, under the law of the respondent;

(ii)

in the case of other information, under a law or rules that the Tribunal
determines to be applicable to the disclosure of such information;

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment:
(a)

in its territory;

(b)

made in accordance with the applicable law at the time the investment is made;

(c)

directly or indirectly owned or controlled by an investor of the other Party; and

(d)

existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or made or acquired
thereafter;

38

disputing party means the investor that initiates proceedings pursuant to Section F or the
respondent. For the purposes of Section F and without prejudice to Article 8.14, an investor
does not include a Party;
disputing parties means both the investor and the respondent;
enjoin means an order to prohibit or restrain an action;
enterprise means an enterprise as defined in Article 1.1 (Definitions of general application)
and a branch or representative office of an enterprise;
ground handling services means the supply of a service on a fee or contract basis for: ground
administration and supervision, including load control and communications; passenger
handling; baggage handling; cargo and mail handling; ramp handling and aircraft services;
fuel and oil handling; aircraft line maintenance, flight operations and crew administration;
surface transport; or catering services. Ground handling services do not include security
services or the operation or management of centralised airport infrastructure, such as baggage
handling systems, de-icing facilities, fuel distribution systems, or intra-airport transport
systems;
ICSID means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;
ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the
Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes;
ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, done at Washington on 18 March 1965;
intellectual property rights means copyright and related rights, trademark rights, rights in
geographical indications, rights in industrial designs, patent rights, rights in layout designs of
integrated circuits, rights in relation to protection of undisclosed information, and plant
breeders’ rights; and, if such rights are provided by a Party’s law, utility model rights. The
CETA Joint Committee may, by decision, add other categories of intellectual property to this
definition;
investment means every kind of asset that an investor owns or controls, directly or indirectly,
that has the characteristics of an investment, which includes a certain duration and other
characteristics such as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or
profit, or the assumption of risk. Forms that an investment may take include:
(a)

an enterprise;

(b)

shares, stocks and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise;

(c)

bonds, debentures and other debt instruments of an enterprise;

(d)

a loan to an enterprise;

(e)

any other kind of interest in an enterprise;

(f)

an interest arising from:
(i)

a concession conferred pursuant to the law of a Party or under a contract,
including to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources,

(ii)

a turnkey, construction, production or revenue-sharing contract; or

39

(iii) other similar contracts;
(g)

intellectual property rights;

(h)

other moveable property, tangible or intangible, or immovable property and related
rights;

(i)

claims to money or claims to performance under a contract.

For greater certainty, claims to money does not include:
(i)

claims to money that arise solely from commercial contracts for the sale of goods or
services by a natural person or enterprise in the territory of a Party to a natural person
or enterprise in the territory of the other Party.

(ii)

the domestic financing of such contracts; or

(iii)

any order, judgment, or arbitral award related to sub-subparagraph (i) or (ii).

Returns that are invested shall be treated as investments. Any alteration of the form in which
assets are invested or reinvested does not affect their qualification as investment;
investor means a Party, a natural person or an enterprise of a Party, other than a branch or a
representative office, that seeks to make, is making or has made an investment in the territory
of the other Party;
For the purposes of this definition, an enterprise of a Party is:
(a)

an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the laws of that Party and has
substantial business activities in the territory of that Party; or

(b)

an enterprise that is constituted or organised under the laws of that Party and is
directly or indirectly owned or controlled by a natural person of that Party or by an
enterprise mentioned under paragraph (a);

locally established enterprise means a juridical person that is constituted or organised under
the laws of the respondent and that an investor of the other Party owns or controls directly or
indirectly;
natural person means:
(a)

in the case of Canada, a natural person who is a citizen or permanent resident of
Canada; and

(b)

in the case of the European Union, a natural person having the nationality of one of
the Member States of the European Union according to their respective laws, and, for
Latvia, also a natural person permanently residing in the Republic of Latvia who is
not a citizen of the Republic of Latvia or any other state but who is entitled, under
laws and regulations of the Republic of Latvia, to receive a non-citizen’s passport.

A natural person who is a citizen of Canada and has the nationality of one of the Member
States of the European Union is deemed to be exclusively a natural person of the Party of his
or her dominant and effective nationality.
A natural person who has the nationality of one of the Member States of the European Union
or is a citizen of Canada, and is also a permanent resident of the other Party, is deemed to be
exclusively a natural person of the Party of his or her nationality or citizenship, as applicable;

40

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York on 10 June 1958;
non-disputing Party means Canada, if the European Union or a Member State of the
European Union is the respondent, or the European Union, if Canada is the respondent;
respondent means Canada or, in the case of the European Union, either the Member State of
the European Union or the European Union pursuant to Article 8.21;
returns means all amounts yielded by an investment or reinvestment, including profits,
royalties and interest or other fees and payments in kind;
selling and marketing of air transport service means opportunity for the air carrier
concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of marketing
such as market research, advertising and distribution, but does not include the pricing of air
transport services or the applicable conditions;
third party funding means any funding provided by a natural or legal person who is not a
party to the dispute but who enters into an agreement with a disputing party in order to
finance part or all of the cost of the proceedings either through a donation or grant, or in
return for remuneration dependent on the outcome of the dispute.
Tribunal means a tribunal established under Article 8.27 or 8.43;
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;
UNCITRAL Transparency Rules means the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency in Treatybased Investor-State Arbitration;
Article 8.2
Scope
1.

2.

This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party in its territory3
relating to:
(a)

an investor of the other Party;

(b)

a covered investment; and

(c)

with respect to Article 8.5, any investments in its territory.

With respect to the establishment or acquisition of a covered investment, 4 Sections B
and C do not apply to a measure relating to:

3

For greater certainty, the obligations of this Chapter apply to the Exclusive Economic Zones and
Continental Shelves, as provided in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at
Montego Bay on 10 December 1982:
(a) of Canada as referred to in Article 1.3(a) (Geographical scope of application); and
(b) to which the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
are applied as referred to in Article 1.3(b) (Geographical scope of application).

4

For greater certainty, a Party may maintain measures with respect to the establishment or acquisition of
a covered investment and continue to apply such measures to the covered investment after it has been
established or acquired.

41

(a)

air services, or related services in support of air services and other services
supplied by means of air transport5, other than:
(i)

aircraft repair and maintenance services;

(ii)

the selling and marketing of air transport services;

(iii) computer reservation system (CRS) services;
(iv) ground handling services;
(v)
(b)

airport operation services; or

activities carried out in the exercise of governmental authority.

3.

For the European Union, Sections B and C do not apply to a measure with respect to
audio-visual services. For Canada, Sections B and C do not apply to a measure with
respect to cultural industries.

4.

Claims may be submitted by an investor under this Chapter only in accordance with
Article 8.18, and in compliance with the procedures set out in Section F. Claims in
respect of an obligation set out in Section B are excluded from the scope of Section
F. Claims under Section C with respect to the establishment or acquisition of a
covered investment are excluded from the scope of Section F. Section D applies only
to a covered investment and to investors in respect of their covered investment.

5.

This Chapter does not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under the
Agreement on Air Transport between Canada and the European Community and its
Member States, done at Brussels on 17 December 2009 and Ottawa on 18 December
2009.
Article 8.3
Relation to other chapters

1.

This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party to the
extent that the measures apply to investors or to their investments covered by
Chapter Thirteen (Financial Services).

2.

A requirement by a Party that a service supplier of the other Party post a bond or
other form of financial security as a condition for supplying a service in its territory
does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to measures adopted or maintained by
the Party relating to the supply of that cross-border service. This Chapter applies to
measures adopted or maintained by the Party relating to the posted bond or financial
security to the extent that such bond or financial security is a covered investment.
SECTION B
Establishment of investments

5

These services include services when an aircraft is being used to carry out specialised activities in
sectors including agriculture, construction, photography, surveying, mapping, forestry, observation and
patrol, or advertising, if the specialised activity is provided by the person that is responsible for the
operation of the aircraft.

42

Article 8.4
Market access
1.

A Party shall not adopt or maintain with respect to market access through
establishment by an investor of the other Party, on the basis of its entire territory or
on the basis of the territory of a national, provincial, territorial, regional or local level
of government, a measure that:
(a)

imposes limitations on:
(i)

the number of enterprises that may carry out a specific economic activity
whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive suppliers
or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii)

the total value of transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or
the requirement of an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of operations or the total quantity of output expressed in
terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test;6
(iv) the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage limit
on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate
foreign investment; or
(v)

(b)
2.

6

the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular
sector or that an enterprise may employ and who are necessary for, and
directly related to, the performance of economic activity in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; or

restricts or requires specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which
an enterprise may carry out an economic activity.

For greater certainty, the following are consistent with paragraph 1:
(a)

a measure concerning zoning and planning regulations affecting the
development or use of land, or another analogous measure;

(b)

a measure requiring the separation of the ownership of infrastructure from the
ownership of the goods or services provided through that infrastructure to
ensure fair competition, for example in the fields of energy, transportation and
telecommunications;

(c)

a measure restricting the concentration of ownership to ensure fair competition;

(d)

a measure seeking to ensure the conservation and protection of natural
resources and the environment, including a limitation on the availability,
number and scope of concessions granted, and the imposition of a moratorium
or ban;

Sub-subparagraphs 1(a) (i), (ii) and (iii) do not cover measures taken in order to limit the production of an
agricultural good.

43

(e)

a measure limiting the number of authorisations granted because of technical or
physical constraints, for example telecommunications spectrum and
frequencies; or

(f)

a measure requiring that a certain percentage of the shareholders, owners,
partners, or directors of an enterprise be qualified or practice a certain
profession such as lawyers or accountants.
Article 8.5
Performance requirements

1.

2.

A Party shall not impose, or enforce the following requirements, or enforce a
commitment or undertaking, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, conduct, operation, and management of any investments in its territory to:
(a)

export a given level or percentage of a good or service;

(b)

achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(c)

purchase, use or accord a preference to a good produced or service provided in
its territory, or to purchase a good or service from natural persons or
enterprises in its territory;

(d)

relate the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to
the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with that investment;

(e)

restrict sales of a good or service in its territory that the investment produces or
provides by relating those sales to the volume or value of its exports or foreign
exchange earnings;

(f)

transfer technology, a production process or other proprietary knowledge to a
natural person or enterprise in its territory; or

(g)

supply exclusively from the territory of the Party a good produced or a service
provided by the investment to a specific regional or world market.

A Party shall not condition the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in
connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct or
operation of any investments in its territory, on compliance with any of the following
requirements:
(a)

to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(b)

to purchase, use or accord a preference to a good produced in its territory, or to
purchase a good from a producer in its territory;

(c)

to relate the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to
the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated with that investment; or

(d)

to restrict sales of a good or service in its territory that the investment produces
or provides by relating those sales to the volume or value of its exports or
foreign exchange earnings.

44

3.

Paragraph 2 does not prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued
receipt of an advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory, on
compliance with a requirement to locate production, provide a service, train or
employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and
development in its territory.

4.

Subparagraph 1(f) does not apply if the requirement is imposed or the commitment
or undertaking is enforced by a court, administrative tribunal or competition
authority to remedy a violation of competition laws.

5.

The provisions of:
(a)

subparagraphs 1(a), (b) and (c), and 2(a) and (b), do not apply to qualification
requirements for a good or service with respect to participation in export
promotion and foreign aid programs;

(b)

this Article does not apply to procurement by a Party of a good or service
purchased for governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial resale
or with a view to use in the supply of a good or service for commercial sale,
whether or not that procurement is “covered procurement” within the meaning
of Article 19.2 (Scope and coverage).

6.

For greater certainty, subparagraphs 2(a) and (b) do not apply to requirements
imposed by an importing Party relating to the content of a good necessary to qualify
for preferential tariffs or preferential quotas.

7.

This Article is without prejudice to World Trade Organization commitments of a
Party.
SECTION C
Non-discriminatory treatment
Article 8.6
National treatment

1.

Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party and to a covered investment,
treatment no less favourable than the treatment it accords, in like situations to its own
investors and to their investments with respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, conduct, operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment and sale
or disposal of their investments in its territory.

2.

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a
government in Canada other than at the federal level, or, with respect to a
government of or in a Member State of the European Union, treatment no less
favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like situations, by that
government to investors of that Party in its territory and to investments of such
investors.

45

Article 8.7
Most-favoured-nation treatment
1.

Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party and to a covered investment,
treatment no less favourable than the treatment it accords in like situations, to
investors of a third country and to their investments with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, conduct, operation, management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment and sale or disposal of their investments in its territory.

2.

For greater certainty, the treatment accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means,
with respect to a government in Canada other than at the federal level, or, with
respect to a government of or in a Member State of the European Union, treatment
accorded, in like situations, by that government to investors in its territory, and to
investments of such investors, of a third country.

3

Paragraph 1 does not apply to treatment accorded by a Party providing for
recognition, including through an arrangement or agreement with a third country that
recognises the accreditation of testing and analysis services and service suppliers, the
accreditation of repair and maintenance services and service suppliers, as well as the
certification of the qualifications of or the results of or work done by those accredited
services and service suppliers.

4.

For greater certainty, the “treatment” referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 does not
include procedures for the resolution of investment disputes between investors and
states provided for in other international investment treaties and other trade
agreements. Substantive obligations in other international investment treaties and
other trade agreements do not in themselves constitute “treatment”, and thus cannot
give rise to a breach of this Article, absent measures adopted or maintained by a
Party pursuant to those obligations.
Article 8.8
Senior management and boards of directors

A Party shall not require that an enterprise of that Party, that is also a covered investment,
appoint to senior management or board of director positions, natural persons of any particular
nationality.
SECTION D
Investment protection
Article 8.9
Investment and regulatory measures

46

1.

For the purpose of this Chapter, the Parties reaffirm their right to regulate within
their territories to achieve legitimate policy objectives, such as the protection of
public health, safety, the environment or public morals, social or consumer
protection or the promotion and protection of cultural diversity.

2.

For greater certainty, the mere fact that a Party regulates, including through a
modification to its laws, in a manner which negatively affects an investment or
interferes with an investor’s expectations, including its expectations of profits, does
not amount to a breach of an obligation under this Section.

3.

For greater certainty, a Party’s decision not to issue, renew or maintain a subsidy:
(a)

in the absence of any specific commitment under law or contract to issue,
renew, or maintain that subsidy; or

(b)

in accordance with any terms or conditions attached to the issuance, renewal
or maintenance of the subsidy,

does not constitute a breach of the provisions of this Section.
4.

For greater certainty, nothing in this Section shall be construed as preventing a Party
from discontinuing the granting of a subsidy7 or requesting its reimbursement where
such measure is necessary in order to comply with international obligations between
the Parties or has been ordered by a competent court, administrative tribunal or other
competent authority8, or requiring that Party to compensate the investor therefor.

Article 8.10
Treatment of investors and of covered investments
1.

Each Party shall accord in its territory to covered investments of the other Party and
to investors with respect to their covered investments fair and equitable treatment
and full protection and security in accordance with paragraphs 2 through 6.

2.

A Party breaches the obligation of fair and equitable treatment referenced in
paragraph 1 if a measure or series of measures constitutes:

7
8

(a)

denial of justice in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings;

(b)

fundamental breach of due process, including a fundamental breach of
transparency, in judicial and administrative proceedings;

In the case of the European Union, “subsidy” includes “state aid” as defined in its law.
In the case of the European Union, “competent authority” is the European Commission, in accordance
with Article 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

47

(c)

manifest arbitrariness;

(d)

targeted discrimination on manifestly wrongful grounds, such as gender, race
or religious belief;

(e)

abusive treatment of investors, such as coercion, duress and harassment; or

(f)

a breach of any further elements of the fair and equitable treatment obligation
adopted by the Parties in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.

3.

The Parties shall regularly, or upon request of a Party, review the content of the
obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment. The Committee on Services and
Investment, established under Article 26.2.1(b) (Specialised committees), may
develop recommendations in this regard and submit them to the CETA Joint
Committee for decision.

4.

When applying the above fair and equitable treatment obligation, a Tribunal may
take into account whether a Party made a specific representation to an investor to
induce a covered investment, that created a legitimate expectation, and upon which
the investor relied in deciding to make or maintain the covered investment, but that
the Party subsequently frustrated.

5.

For greater certainty, “full protection and security” refers to the Party’s obligations
relating to the physical security of investors and covered investments.

6.

For greater certainty, a breach of another provision of this Agreement, or of a
separate international agreement does not establish a breach of this Article.

7.

For greater certainty, the fact that a measure breaches domestic law does not, in and
of itself, establish a breach of this Article. In order to ascertain whether the measure
breaches this Article, a Tribunal must consider whether a Party has acted
inconsistently with the obligations in paragraph 1.

Article 8.11
Compensation for losses
Notwithstanding Article 8.15.5(b), each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party,
whose covered investments suffer losses owing to armed conflict, civil strife, a state of
emergency or natural disaster in its territory, treatment no less favourable than that it accords
to its own investors or to the investors of a third country, whichever is more favourable to the
investor concerned, as regards restitution, indemnification, compensation or other settlement.
Article 8.12
Expropriation

48

1.

A Party shall not nationalise or expropriate a covered investment either directly, or
indirectly through measures having an effect equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation (“expropriation”), except:
(a)

for a public purpose;

(b)

under due process of law;

(c)

in a non-discriminatory manner; and

(d)

on payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

For greater certainty, this paragraph shall be interpreted in accordance with Annex 8A.
2.

The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 shall amount to the fair market value of
the investment at the time immediately before the expropriation or the impending
expropriation became known, whichever is earlier. Valuation criteria shall include
going concern value, asset value including the declared tax value of tangible
property, and other criteria, as appropriate, to determine fair market value.

3.

The compensation shall also include interest at a normal commercial rate from the
date of expropriation until the date of payment and shall, in order to be effective for
the investor, be paid and made transferable, without delay, to the country designated
by the investor and in the currency of the country of which the investor is a national
or in any freely convertible currency accepted by the investor.

4.

The affected investor shall have the right, under the law of the expropriating Party, to
a prompt review of its claim and of the valuation of its investment, by a judicial or
other independent authority of that Party, in accordance with the principles set out in
this Article.

5.

This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licences granted in relation
to intellectual property rights, to the extent that such issuance is consistent with the
TRIPS Agreement.

6.

For greater certainty, the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property
rights, to the extent that these measures are consistent with the TRIPS Agreement
and Chapter Twenty (Intellectual Property), do not constitute expropriation.
Moreover, a determination that these measures are inconsistent with the TRIPS
Agreement or Chapter Twenty (Intellectual Property) does not establish an
expropriation.
Article 8.13
Transfers

1.

Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to a covered investment to be made
without restriction or delay in a freely convertible currency and at the market rate of
exchange applicable on the date of transfer. Such transfers include:

49

(a)

contributions to capital, such as principal and additional funds to maintain,
develop or increase the investment;

(b)

profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, management fees,
technical assistance and other fees, or other forms of returns or amounts
derived from the covered investment;

(c)

proceeds from the sale or liquidation of the whole or a part of the covered
investment;

(d)

payments made under a contract entered into by the investor or the covered
investment, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

(e)

payments made pursuant to Articles 8.11 and 8.12;

(f)

earnings and other remuneration of foreign personnel working in connection
with an investment; and

(g)

payments of damages pursuant to an award issued under Section F.

2.

A Party shall not require its investors to transfer, or penalise its investors for failing
to transfer, the income, earnings, profits or other amounts derived from, or
attributable to, investments in the territory of the other Party.

3.

Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent a Party from applying in an
equitable and non-discriminatory manner and not in a way that would constitute a
disguised restriction on transfers, its laws relating to:
(a)

bankruptcy, insolvency or the protection of the rights of creditors;

(b)

issuing, trading or dealing in securities;

(c)

criminal or penal offences;

(d)

financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law
enforcement or financial regulatory authorities; and

(e)

the satisfaction of judgments in adjudicatory proceedings.
Article 8.14
Subrogation

If a Party, or an agency of a Party, makes a payment under an indemnity, guarantee or
contract of insurance that it has entered into in respect of an investment made by one of its
investors in the territory of the other Party, the other Party shall recognise that the Party or its
agency shall be entitled in all circumstances to the same rights as those of the investor in
respect of the investment. These rights may be exercised by the Party or an agency of the
Party, or by the investor if the Party or an agency of the Party thereof so authorises.
SECTION E
Reservations and exceptions

50

Article 8.15
Reservations and exceptions
1.

Articles 8.4 through 8.8 do not apply to:
(a)

an existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the level
of:
(i)

the European Union, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii)

a national government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(iii) a provincial, territorial, or regional government, as set out by that Party in
its Schedule to Annex I; or
(iv) a local government.
(b)

the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a); or

(c)

an amendment to a non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to
the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Articles 8.4
through 8.8.

2.

Articles 8.4 through 8.8 do not apply to a measure that a Party adopts or maintains
with respect to a sector, subsector or activity, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.

3.

Without prejudice to Articles 8.10 and 8.12, a Party shall not adopt a measure or
series of measures after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and covered by
its Schedule to Annex II, that require, directly or indirectly an investor of the other
Party, by reason of nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an investment existing
at the time the measure or series of measures become effective.

4.

In respect of intellectual property rights, a Party may derogate from Articles 8.5.1(f),
8.6, and 8.7 if permitted by the TRIPS Agreement, including any amendments to the
TRIPS Agreement in force for both Parties, and waivers to the TRIPS Agreement
adopted pursuant to Article IX of the WTO Agreement.

5.

Articles 8.4, 8.6, 8.7 and 8.8 do not apply to:
(a)

procurement by a Party of a good or service purchased for governmental
purposes and not with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the
supply of a good or service for commercial sale, whether or not that
procurement is “covered procurement” within the meaning of Article 19.2
(Scope and coverage); or

(b)

subsidies, or government support relating to trade in services, provided by a
Party.

51

Article 8.16
Denial of benefits
A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that is an
enterprise of that Party and to investments of that investor if:
(a)

an investor of a third country owns or controls the enterprise; and

(b)

the denying Party adopts or maintains a measure with respect to the third country
that:
(i)

relates to the maintenance of international peace and security; and

(ii)

prohibits transactions with the enterprise or would be violated or circumvented
if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise or to its
investments.
Article 8.17
Formal requirements

Notwithstanding Articles 8.6 and 8.7, a Party may require an investor of the other Party, or its
covered investment, to provide routine information concerning that investment solely for
informational or statistical purposes, provided that those requests are reasonable and not
unduly burdensome. The Party shall protect confidential or protected information from any
disclosure that would prejudice the competitive position of the investor or the covered
investment. This paragraph does not prevent a Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing
information in connection with the equitable and good faith application of its laws.
SECTION F
Resolution of investment disputes between investors and states
Article 8.18
Scope
1.

Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under Chapter TwentyNine (Dispute Settlement), an investor of a Party may submit to the Tribunal
constituted under this Section a claim that the other Party has breached an obligation
under:
(a)

Section C, with respect to the expansion, conduct, operation, management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment and sale or disposal of its covered investment; or

(b)

Section D:

where the investor claims to have suffered loss or damage as a result of the alleged
breach.
2.

Claims under subparagraph 1(a) with respect to the expansion of a covered
investment may be submitted only to the extent the measure relates to the existing
business operations of a covered investment and the investor has, as a result,
incurred loss or damage with respect to the covered investment.
52

3.

For greater certainty, an investor may not submit a claim under this Section if the
investment has been made through fraudulent misrepresentation, concealment,
corruption, or conduct amounting to an abuse of process.

4.

A claim with respect to restructuring of debt issued by a Party may only be submitted
under this Section in accordance with Annex 8-B.

5.

A Tribunal constituted under this Section shall not decide claims that fall outside of
the scope of this Article.
Article 8.19
Consultations

1.

A dispute should as far as possible be settled amicably. Such a settlement may be
agreed at any time, including after the claim has been submitted pursuant to Article
8.23. Unless the disputing parties agree to a longer period, consultations shall be held
within 60 days of the submission of the request for consultations pursuant to
paragraph 4.

2.

Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the place of consultation shall be:
(a)

Ottawa, if the measures challenged are measures of Canada;

(b)

Brussels, if the measures challenged include a measure of the European Union;
or

(c)

the capital of the Member State of the European Union, if the measures
challenged are exclusively measures of that Member State.

3.

The disputing parties may hold the consultations through videoconference or other
means where appropriate, such as in the case where the investor is a small or
medium-sized enterprise.

4.

The investor shall submit to the other Party a request for consultations setting out:
(a)

the name and address of the investor and, if such request is submitted on behalf
of a locally established enterprise, the name, address and place of incorporation
of the locally established enterprise;

(b)

if there is more than one investor, the name and address of each investor and, if
there is more than one locally established enterprise, the name, address and
place of incorporation of each locally established enterprise;

(c)

the provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been breached;

(d)

the legal and the factual basis for the claim, including the measures at issue;
and

(e)

the relief sought and the estimated amount of damages claimed.

53

The request for consultations shall contain evidence establishing that the investor is
an investor of the other Party and that it owns or controls the investment including, if
applicable, that it owns or controls the locally established enterprise on whose behalf
the request is submitted.
5.

The requirements of the request for consultations set out in paragraph 4 shall be met
with sufficient specificity to allow the respondent to effectively engage in
consultations and to prepare its defence.

6.

A request for consultations must be submitted within:
(a)

three years after the date on which the investor or, as applicable, the locally
established enterprise, first acquired or should have first acquired, knowledge
of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor or, as applicable, the
locally established enterprise, has incurred loss or damage thereby; or

(b)

two years after an investor or, as applicable, the locally established enterprise,
ceases to pursue claims or proceedings before a tribunal or court under the law
of a Party, or when such proceedings have otherwise ended and, in any event,
no later than 10 years after the date on which the investor or, as applicable, the
locally established enterprise, first acquired or should have first acquired
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred
loss or damage thereby.

7.

A request for consultations concerning an alleged breach by the European Union or a
Member State of the European Union shall be sent to the European Union.

8.

In the event that the investor has not submitted a claim pursuant to Article 8.23
within 18 months of submitting the request for consultations, the investor is deemed
to have withdrawn its request for consultations and, if applicable, its notice
requesting a determination of the respondent, and shall not submit a claim under this
Section with respect to the same measures. This period may be extended by
agreement of the disputing parties.
Article 8.20
Mediation

1.

The disputing parties may at any time agree to have recourse to mediation.

2.

Recourse to mediation is without prejudice to the legal position or rights of either
disputing party under this Chapter and is governed by the rules agreed to by the
disputing parties including, if available, the rules for mediation adopted by the
Committee on Services and Investment pursuant to Article 8.44.3(c).

3.

The mediator is appointed by agreement of the disputing parties. The disputing
parties may also request that the Secretary-General of ICSID appoint the mediator.

54

4.

The disputing parties shall endeavour to reach a resolution of the dispute within 60
days from the appointment of the mediator.

5.

If the disputing parties agree to have recourse to mediation, Articles 8.19.6 and
8.19.8 shall not apply from the date on which the disputing parties agreed to have
recourse to mediation to the date on which either disputing party decides to terminate
the mediation. A decision by a disputing party to terminate the mediation shall be
transmitted by way of a letter to the mediator and the other disputing party.
Article 8.21
Determination of the respondent for disputes with
the European Union or its Member States

1.

If the dispute cannot be settled within 90 days of the submission of the request for
consultations, the request concerns an alleged breach of the Agreement by the
European Union or a Member State of the European Union and the investor intends
to submit a claim pursuant to Article 8.23, the investor shall deliver to the European
Union a notice requesting a determination of the respondent.

2.

The notice under paragraph 1 shall identify the measures in respect of which the
investor intends to submit a claim.

3.

The European Union shall, after having made a determination, inform the investor as
to whether the European Union or a Member State of the European Union shall be
the respondent.

4.

In the event that the investor has not been informed of the determination within 50
days of delivering its notice requesting such determination:
(a)

if the measures identified in the notice are exclusively measures of a Member
State of the European Union, the Member State shall be the respondent.

(b)

if the measures identified in the notice include measures of the European
Union, the European Union shall be the respondent.

5.

The investor may submit a claim pursuant to Article 8.23 on the basis of the
determination made pursuant to paragraph 3, and, if no such determination has been
communicated to the investor, on the basis of the application of paragraph 4.

6.

If the European Union or a Member State of the European Union is the respondent,
pursuant to paragraph 3 or 4, neither the European Union, nor the Member State of
the European Union may assert the inadmissibility of the claim, lack of jurisdiction
of the Tribunal or otherwise object to the claim or award on the ground that the
respondent was not properly determined pursuant to paragraph 3 or identified on the
basis of the application of paragraph 4.

55

7.

The Tribunal shall be bound by the determination made pursuant to paragraph 3 and,
if no such determination has been communicated to the investor, the application of
paragraph 4.
Article 8.22
Procedural and other requirements for the submission of a claim to the Tribunal

1.

An investor may only submit a claim pursuant to Article 8.23 if the investor:
(a)

delivers to the respondent, with the submission of a claim, its consent to the
settlement of the dispute by the Tribunal in accordance with the procedures set
out in this Section;

(b)

allows at least 180 days to elapse from the submission of the request for
consultations and, if applicable, at least 90 days to elapse from the submission
of the notice requesting a determination of the respondent;

(c)

has fulfilled the requirements of the notice requesting a determination of the
respondent;

(d)

has fulfilled the requirements related to the request for consultations;

(e)

does not identify a measure in its claim that was not identified in its request for
consultations;

(f)

withdraws or discontinues any existing proceeding before a tribunal or court
under domestic or international law with respect to a measure alleged to
constitute a breach referred to in its claim; and

(g) waives its right to initiate any claim or proceeding before a tribunal or court
under domestic or international law with respect to a measure alleged to
constitute a breach referred to in its claim.
2.

If the claim submitted pursuant to Article 8.23 is for loss or damage to a locally
established enterprise or to an interest in a locally established enterprise that the
investor owns or controls directly or indirectly, the requirements in subparagraphs
1(f) and (g) apply both to the investor and the locally established enterprise).

3.

The requirements of subparagraphs 1(f) and (g) and paragraph 2 do not apply in
respect of a locally established enterprise if the respondent or the investor’s host state
has deprived the investor of control of the locally established enterprise, or has
otherwise prevented the locally established enterprise from fulfilling those
requirements.

4.

Upon request of the respondent, the Tribunal shall decline jurisdiction if the investor
or, as applicable, the locally established enterprise fails to fulfil any of the
requirements of paragraphs 1 and 2.

5.

The waiver provided pursuant to subparagraph 1(g) or paragraph 2 as applicable
shall cease to apply:

56

(a)

if the Tribunal rejects the claim on the basis of a failure to meet the
requirements of paragraph 1 or 2 or on any other procedural or jurisdictional
grounds;

(b)

if the Tribunal dismisses the claim pursuant to Article 8.32 or Article 8.33; or

(c)

if the investor withdraws its claim, in conformity with the applicable rules
under Article 8.23.2, within 12 months of the constitution of the division of the
Tribunal.
Article 8.23
Submission of a claim to the Tribunal

1.

2.

If a dispute has not been resolved through consultations, a claim may be submitted
under this Section by:
(a)

an investor of a Party on its own behalf; or

(b)

an investor of a Party, on behalf of a locally established enterprise which it
owns or controls directly or indirectly.

A claim may be submitted under the following rules:
(a)

the ICSID Convention and Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings;

(b)

the ICSID Additional Facility Rules if the conditions for proceedings pursuant
to paragraph (a) do not apply;

(c)

the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or

(d)

any other rules on agreement of the disputing parties.

3.

In the event that the investor proposes rules pursuant to subparagraph 2(d), the
respondent shall reply to the investor’s proposal within 20 days of receipt. If the
disputing parties have not agreed on such rules within 30 days of receipt, the investor
may submit a claim under the rules provided for in subparagraph 2(a), (b) or (c).

4.

For greater certainty, a claim submitted under subparagraph 1(b) shall satisfy the
requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

5.

The investor may, when submitting its claim, propose that a sole Member of the
Tribunal should hear the claim. The respondent shall give sympathetic consideration
to that request, in particular if the investor is a small or medium-sized enterprise or
the compensation or damages claimed are relatively low.

6.

The rules applicable under paragraph 2 that are in effect on the date that the claim or
claims are submitted to the Tribunal under this Section, subject to the specific rules
set out in this Section and supplemented by rules adopted pursuant to Article
8.44.3(b).

7.

A claim is submitted for dispute settlement under this Section when:
57

8.

(a)

the request under Article 36(1) of the ICSID Convention is received by the
Secretary-General of ICSID;

(b)

the request under Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules is received by the Secretariat of ICSID;

(c)

the notice under Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules is received by
the respondent; or

(d)

the request or notice initiating proceedings is received by the respondent in
accordance with the rules agreed upon pursuant to subparagraph 2(d).

Each Party shall notify the other Party of the place of delivery of notices and other
documents by the investors pursuant to this Section. Each Party shall ensure this
information is made publicly available.
Article 8.24
Proceedings under another international agreement

Where a claim is brought pursuant to this Section and another international agreement and:
(a)

there is a potential for overlapping compensation; or

(b)

the other international claim could have a significant impact on the resolution of the
claim brought pursuant to this Section,

the Tribunal shall, as soon as possible after hearing the disputing parties, stay its proceedings
or otherwise ensure that proceedings brought pursuant to another international agreement are
taken into account in its decision, order or award.
Article 8.25
Consent to the settlement of the dispute by the Tribunal
1.

The respondent consents to the settlement of the dispute by the Tribunal in
accordance with the procedures set out in this Section.

2.

The consent under paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to the Tribunal under
this Section shall satisfy the requirements of:
(a)

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Chapter II of the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules regarding written consent of the disputing parties; and,

(b)

Article II of the New York Convention for an agreement in writing.

58

Article 8.26
Third party funding
1.

Where there is third party funding, the disputing party benefiting from it shall disclose
to the other disputing party and to the Tribunal the name and address of the third party
funder.

2.

The disclosure shall be made at the time of the submission of a claim, or, if the
financing agreement is concluded or the donation or grant is made after the submission
of a claim, without delay as soon as the agreement is concluded or the donation or
grant is made.
Article 8.27

1.

Constitution of the Tribunal
The Tribunal established under this Section shall decide claims submitted pursuant to
Article 8.23.

2.

The CETA Joint Committee shall, upon the entry into force of this Agreement, appoint
fifteen Members of the Tribunal. Five of the Members of the Tribunal shall be
nationals of a Member State of the European Union, five shall be nationals of Canada9
and five shall be nationals of third countries.

3.

The CETA Joint Committee may decide to increase or to decrease the number of the
Members of the Tribunal by multiples of three. Additional appointments shall be made
on the same basis as provided for in paragraph 2.

4.

The Members of the Tribunal shall possess the qualifications required in their
respective countries for appointment to judicial office, or be jurists of recognised
competence. They shall have demonstrated expertise in public international law. It is
desirable that they have expertise in particular, in international investment law, in
international trade law and the resolution of disputes arising under international
investment or international trade agreements.

5.

The Members of the Tribunal appointed pursuant to this Section shall be appointed for
a five-year term, renewable once. However, the terms of seven of the 15 persons
appointed immediately after the entry into force of the Agreement, to be determined
by lot, shall extend to six years. Vacancies shall be filled as they arise. A person
appointed to replace a Member of the Tribunal whose term of office has not expired
shall hold office for the remainder of the predecessor's term. In principle, a Member of
the Tribunal serving on a division of the Tribunal when his or her term expires may
continue to serve on the division until a final award is issued.

9

Either Party may instead propose to appoint up to five Members of the Tribunal of any nationality. In
this case, such Members of the Tribunal shall be considered to be nationals of the Party that proposed
his or her appointment for the purposes of this Article.

59

6.

The Tribunal shall hear cases in divisions consisting of three Members of the Tribunal,
of whom one shall be a national of a Member State of the European Union, one a
national of Canada and one a national of a third country. The division shall be chaired
by the Member of the Tribunal who is a national of a third country.

7.

Within 90 days of the submission of a claim pursuant to Article 8.23, the President of
the Tribunal shall appoint the Members of the Tribunal composing the division of the
Tribunal hearing the case on a rotation basis, ensuring that the composition of the
divisions is random and unpredictable, while giving equal opportunity to all Members
of the Tribunal to serve.

8.

The President and Vice-President of the Tribunal shall be responsible for
organisational issues and will be appointed for a two-year term and shall be drawn by
lot from among the Members of the Tribunal who are nationals of third countries.
They shall serve on the basis of a rotation drawn by lot by the Chair of the CETA Joint
Committee. The Vice-President shall replace the President when the President is
unavailable.

9.

Notwithstanding paragraph 6, the disputing parties may agree that a case be heard by a
sole Member of the Tribunal to be appointed at random from the third country
nationals. The respondent shall give sympathetic consideration to a request from the
claimant to have the case heard by a sole Member of the Tribunal, in particular where
the claimant is a small or medium-sized enterprise or the compensation or damages
claimed are relatively low. Such a request shall be made before the constitution of the
division of the Tribunal.

10.

The Tribunal may draw up its own working procedures.

11.

The Members of the Tribunal shall ensure that they are available and able to perform
the functions set out under this Section.

12.

In order to ensure their availability, the Members of the Tribunal shall be paid a
monthly retainer fee to be determined by the CETA Joint Committee.

13.

The fees referred to in paragraph 12 shall be paid equally by both Parties into an
account managed by the ICSID Secretariat. In the event that one Party fails to pay the
retainer fee the other Party may elect to pay. Any such arrears by a Party will remain
payable, with appropriate interest.

14.

Unless the CETA Joint Committee adopts a decision pursuant to paragraph 15, the
amount of the fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal on a division
constituted to hear a claim, other than the fees referred to in paragraph 12, shall be
those determined pursuant to Regulation 14(1) of the Administrative and Financial
Regulations of the ICSID Convention in force on the date of the submission of the
claim and allocated by the Tribunal among the disputing parties in accordance with
Article 8.39.5.

60

15.

The CETA Joint Committee may, by decision, transform the retainer fee and other
fees and expenses into a regular salary, and decide applicable modalities and
conditions.

16.

The ICSID Secretariat shall act as Secretariat for the Tribunal and provide it with
appropriate support.

17.

If the CETA Joint Committee has not made the appointments pursuant to paragraph 2
within 90 days from the date that a claim is submitted for dispute settlement, the
Secretary General of ICSID shall, at the request of either disputing party appoint a
division consisting of three Members of the Tribunal, unless the disputing parties have
agreed that the case is to be heard by a sole Member of the Tribunal. The Secretary
General of ICSID shall make the appointment by random selection from the existing
nominations. The Secretary-General of ICSID may not appoint as chair a national of
either Canada or a Member State of the European Union unless the disputing parties
agree otherwise.

Article 8.28
Appellate Tribunal
1.

An Appellate Tribunal is hereby established to review awards rendered under this
Section.

2.

The Appellate Tribunal may uphold, modify or reverse a Tribunal's award based on:
(a) errors in the application or interpretation of applicable law;
(b) manifest errors in the appreciation of the facts, including the appreciation of
relevant domestic law;
(c) the grounds set out in Article 52(1) (a) through (e) of the ICSID Convention,
in so far as they are not covered by paragraphs (a) and (b).

3.

The Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by a decision of the
CETA Joint Committee at the same time as the decision referred to in paragraph 7.

4.

The Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall meet the requirements of Articles
8.27.4 and comply with Article 8.30.

5.

The division of the Appellate Tribunal constituted to hear the appeal shall consist of
three randomly appointed Members of the Appellate Tribunal.

61

6.

Articles 8.36 and 8.38 shall apply to the proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal.

7.

The CETA Joint Committee shall promptly adopt a decision setting out the following
administrative and organisational matters regarding the functioning of the Appellate
Tribunal:
(a) administrative support;
(b) procedures for the initiation and the conduct of appeals, and procedures for
referring issues back to the Tribunal for adjustment of the award, as appropriate;
(c) procedures for filling a vacancy on the Appellate Tribunal and on a division of
the Appellate Tribunal constituted to hear a case;
(d) remuneration of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal;
(e) provisions related to the costs of appeals;
(f) the number of Members of the Appellate Tribunal; and
(g) any other elements it determines to be necessary for the effective functioning
of the Appellate Tribunal.

8.

The Committee on Services and Investment shall periodically review the functioning
of the Appellate Tribunal and may make recommendations to the CETA Joint
Committee. The CETA Joint Committee may revise the decision referred to in
paragraph 7, if necessary.

9.

Upon adoption of the decision referred to in paragraph 7:
(a) a disputing party may appeal an award rendered pursuant to this Section to the
Appellate Tribunal within 90 days after its issuance;
(b) a disputing party shall not seek to review, set aside, annul, revise or initiate any
other similar procedure as regards an award under this Section;
(c) an award rendered pursuant to Article 8.39 shall not be considered final and
no action for enforcement of an award may be brought until either:
(i) 90 days from the issuance of the award by the Tribunal has elapsed and
no appeal has been initiated;
(ii) an initiated appeal has been rejected or withdrawn; or
(iii) 90 days have elapsed from an award by the Appellate Tribunal and the
Appellate Tribunal has not referred the matter back to the Tribunal;

(d)

a final award by the Appellate Tribunal shall be considered as a final award for the
purposes of Article 8.41; and

62

(e)

Article 8.41.3 shall not apply.

Article 8.29
Establishment of a multilateral investment tribunal and appellate mechanism
The Parties shall pursue with other trading partners the establishment of a multilateral
investment tribunal and appellate mechanism for the resolution of investment disputes. Upon
establishment of such a multilateral mechanism, the CETA Joint Committee shall adopt a
decision providing that investment disputes under this Section will be decided pursuant to the
multilateral mechanism and make appropriate transitional arrangements.
Article 8.30
Ethics
1.

The Members of the Tribunal shall be independent. They shall not be affiliated with
any government.10 They shall not take instructions from any organisation, or
government with regard to matters related to the dispute. They shall not participate in
the consideration of any disputes that would create a direct or indirect conflict of
interest. They shall comply with the International Bar Association Guidelines on
Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration or any supplemental rules adopted
pursuant to Article 8.44.2. In addition, upon appointment, they shall refrain from
acting as counsel or as party-appointed expert or witness in any pending or new
investment dispute under this or any other international agreement.

2.

If a disputing party considers that a Member of the Tribunal has a conflict of interest,
it shall send to the President of the International Court of Justice a notice of
challenge to the appointment. The notice of challenge shall be sent within 15 days of
the date on which the composition of the division of the Tribunal has been
communicated to the disputing party, or within 15 days of the date on which the
relevant facts came to its knowledge, if they could not have reasonably been known
at the time of composition of the division. The notice of challenge shall state the
grounds for the challenge.

3.

If, within 15 days from the date of the notice of challenge, the challenged Member of
the Tribunal has elected not to resign from the division, the President of the
International Court of Justice shall, after hearing the disputing parties and after
providing the Member of the Tribunal an opportunity to submit any observations,
issue a decision within 45 days of receipt of the notice of challenge and notify the
disputing parties and the other Members of the division. A vacancy resulting from
the disqualification or resignation of a Member of the Tribunal shall be filled
promptly.

10

For greater certainty, the fact that a person receives remuneration from a government does not in itself
make that person ineligible.

63

4.

Upon a reasoned recommendation from the President of the Tribunal, or on their
joint initiative, the Parties, by decision of the CETA Joint Committee, may remove a
Member from the Tribunal where his or her behaviour is inconsistent with the
obligations set out in paragraph 1 and incompatible with his or her continued
membership of the Tribunal.
Article 8.31
Applicable law and interpretation

1.

When rendering its decision, the Tribunal established under this Section shall apply
this Agreement as interpreted in accordance with the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties, and other rules and principles of international law applicable between the
Parties.

2.

The Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction to determine the legality of a measure,
alleged to constitute a breach of this Agreement, under the domestic law of the
disputing Party. For greater certainty, in determining the consistency of a measure
with this Agreement, the Tribunal may consider, as appropriate, the domestic law of
the disputing Party as a matter of fact. In doing so, the Tribunal shall follow the
prevailing interpretation given to the domestic law by the courts or authorities of that
Party and any meaning given to domestic law by the Tribunal shall not be binding
upon the courts or the authorities of that Party.

3.

Where serious concerns arise as regards matters of interpretation that may affect
investment, the Committee on Services and Investment may, pursuant to Article
8.44.3(a), recommend to the CETA Joint Committee the adoption of interpretations
of this Agreement. An interpretation adopted by the CETA Joint Committee shall be
binding on a Tribunal established under this Section. The CETA Joint Committee
may decide that an interpretation shall have binding effect from a specific date.
Article 8.32
Claims manifestly without legal merit

1.

The respondent may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the division of the
Tribunal, and in any event before its first session, file an objection that a claim is
manifestly without legal merit.

2.

An objection shall not be submitted under paragraph 1 if the respondent has filed an
objection pursuant to Article 8.33.

3.

The respondent shall specify as precisely as possible the basis for the objection.

4.

On receipt of an objection pursuant to this Article, the Tribunal shall suspend the
proceedings on the merits and establish a schedule for considering such an objection
consistent with its schedule for considering any other preliminary question.
64

5.

The Tribunal, after giving the disputing parties an opportunity to present their
observations, shall at its first session or promptly thereafter, issue a decision or award
stating the grounds therefor. In doing so, the Tribunal shall assume the alleged facts
to be true.

6.

This Article shall be without prejudice to the Tribunal’s authority to address other
objections as a preliminary question or to the right of the respondent to object, in the
course of the proceeding, that a claim lacks legal merit.
Article 8.33
Claims unfounded as a matter of law

1.

Without prejudice to a Tribunal’s authority to address other objections as a
preliminary question or to a respondent’s right to raise any such objections at an
appropriate time, the Tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any
objection by the respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim, or any part thereof,
submitted pursuant to Article 8.23 is not a claim for which an award in favour of the
claimant may be made under this Section, even if the facts alleged were assumed to
be true.

2.

An objection under paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the Tribunal no later than the
date the Tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial.

3.

If an objection has been submitted pursuant to Article 8.32, the Tribunal may, taking
into account the circumstances of that objection, decline to address, under the
procedures set out in this Article, an objection submitted pursuant to paragraph 1.

4.

On receipt of an objection under paragraph 1, and, if appropriate, after rendering a
decision pursuant to paragraph 3, the Tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the
merits, establish a schedule for considering the objection consistent with any
schedule it has established for considering any other preliminary question, and issue
a decision or award on the objection stating the grounds therefor.
Article 8.34
Interim measures of protection

A Tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing
party or to ensure that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is made fully effective, including an order to
preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party or to protect the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. A Tribunal shall not order attachment or enjoin the application of the measure
alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 8.23. For the purposes of this Article, an
order includes a recommendation.
Article 8.35
Discontinuance

65

If, following the submission of a claim under this Section, the investor fails to take any steps
in the proceeding during 180 consecutive days or such periods as the disputing parties may
agree, the investor is deemed to have withdrawn its claim and to have discontinued the
proceeding. The Tribunal shall, at the request of the respondent, and after notice to the
disputing parties, in an order take note of the discontinuance. After the order has been
rendered the authority of the Tribunal shall lapse.
Article 8.36
Transparency of proceedings
1.

The UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, as modified by this Chapter, shall apply in
connection with proceedings under this Section.

2.

The request for consultations, the notice requesting a determination of the
respondent, the notice of determination of the respondent, the agreement to mediate,
the notice of intent to challenge a Member of the Tribunal, the decision on challenge
to a Member of the Tribunal and the request for consolidation shall be included in the
list of documents to be made available to the public under Article 3(1) of the
UNCITRAL Transparency Rules.

3.

Exhibits shall be included in the list of documents to be made available to the public
under Article 3(2) of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules.

4.

Notwithstanding Article 2 of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, prior to the
constitution of the Tribunal, Canada or the European Union as the case may be shall
make publicly available in a timely manner relevant documents pursuant to
paragraph 2, subject to the redaction of confidential or protected information. Such
documents may be made publicly available by communication to the repository.

5.

Hearings shall be open to the public. The Tribunal shall determine, in consultation
with the disputing parties, the appropriate logistical arrangements to facilitate public
access to such hearings. If the Tribunal determines that there is a need to protect
confidential or protected information, it shall make the appropriate arrangements to
hold in private that part of the hearing requiring such protection.

6.

Nothing in this Chapter requires a respondent to withhold from the public
information required to be disclosed by its laws. The respondent should apply those
laws in a manner sensitive to protecting from disclosure information that has been
designated as confidential or protected information.
Article 8.37
Information sharing

1.

A disputing party may disclose to other persons in connection with the proceedings,
including witnesses and experts, such unredacted documents as it considers
necessary in the course of proceedings under this Section. However, the disputing

66

party shall ensure that those persons protect the confidential or protected information
contained in those documents.
2.

This Agreement does not prevent a respondent from disclosing to officials of, as
applicable, the European Union, Member States of the European Union and subnational governments, such unredacted documents as it considers necessary in the
course of proceedings under this Section. However, the respondent shall ensure that
those officials protect the confidential or protected information contained in those
documents.
Article 8.38
Non-disputing Party

1.

The respondent shall, within 30 days after receipt or promptly after any dispute
concerning confidential or protected information has been resolved, deliver to the
non-disputing Party:
(a)

a request for consultations, a notice requesting a determination of the
respondent, a notice of determination of the respondent, a claim submitted
pursuant to Article 8.23, a request for consolidation, and any other documents
that are appended to such documents;

(b)

on request:
(i)

pleadings, memorials, briefs, requests and other submissions made to the
Tribunal by a disputing party;

(ii)

written submissions made to the Tribunal pursuant to Article 4 of the
UNCITRAL Transparency Rules;

(iii) minutes or transcripts of hearings of the Tribunal, if available; and
(iv) orders, awards and decisions of the Tribunal; and
(c)

on request and at the cost of the non-disputing Party, all or part of the evidence
that has been tendered to the Tribunal, unless the requested evidence is
publicly available.

2.

The Tribunal shall accept or, after consultation with the disputing parties, may invite,
oral or written submissions from the non-disputing Party regarding the interpretation
of the Agreement. The non-disputing Party may attend a hearing held under this
Section.

3.

The Tribunal shall not draw any inference from the absence of a submission pursuant
to paragraph 2.

4.

The Tribunal shall ensure that the disputing parties are given a reasonable
opportunity to present their observations on a submission by the non-disputing Party
to this Agreement.

67

Article 8.39
Final award
1.

2.

If the Tribunal makes a final award against the respondent, the Tribunal may only
award, separately or in combination:
(a)

monetary damages and any applicable interest;

(b)

restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the
respondent may pay monetary damages representing the fair market value of
the property at the time immediately before the expropriation, or impending
expropriation became known, whichever is earlier, and any applicable interest
in lieu of restitution, determined in a manner consistent with Article 8.12.

Subject to paragraphs 1 and 5, if a claim is made under Article 8.23.1(b):
(a)

an award of monetary damages and any applicable interest shall provide that
the sum be paid to the locally established enterprise;

(b)

an award of restitution of property shall provide that restitution be made to the
locally established enterprise;

(c)

an award of costs in favour of the investor shall provide that it is to be made to
the investor; and

(d)

the award shall provide that it is made without prejudice to a right that a
person, other than a person which has provided a waiver pursuant to Article
8.22, may have in monetary damages or property awarded under a Party’s law.

3.

Monetary damages shall not be greater than the loss suffered by the investor or, as
applicable, the locally established enterprise, reduced by any prior damages or
compensation already provided. For the calculation of monetary damages, the
Tribunal shall also reduce the damages to take into account any restitution of
property or repeal or modification of the measure.

4.

The Tribunal shall not award punitive damages.

5.

The Tribunal shall order that the costs of the proceedings be borne by the
unsuccessful disputing party. In exceptional circumstances, the Tribunal may
apportion costs between the disputing parties if it determines that apportionment is
appropriate in the circumstances of the claim. Other reasonable costs, including costs
of legal representation and assistance, shall be borne by the unsuccessful disputing
party, unless the Tribunal determines that such apportionment is unreasonable in the
circumstances of the claim. If only parts of the claims have been successful the costs
shall be adjusted, proportionately, to the number or extent of the successful parts of
the claims.

6.

The CETA Joint Committee shall consider supplemental rules aimed at reducing the
financial burden on claimants who are natural persons or small and medium-sized

68

enterprises. Such supplemental rules may, in particular, take into account the
financial resources of such claimants and the amount of compensation sought.
7.

The Tribunal and the disputing parties shall make every effort to ensure the dispute
settlement process is carried out in a timely manner. The Tribunal shall issue its final
award within 24 months of the date the claim is submitted pursuant to Article 8.23. If
the Tribunal requires additional time to issue its final award, it shall provide the
disputing parties the reasons for the delay.

Article 8.40
Indemnification or other compensation
A respondent shall not assert, and a Tribunal shall not accept a defence, counterclaim, right of
setoff, or similar assertion, that an investor or, as applicable, a locally established enterprise,
has received or will receive indemnification or other compensation pursuant to an insurance
or guarantee contract in respect of all or part of the compensation sought in a dispute initiated
pursuant to this Section.
Article 8.41
Enforcement of awards
1.

An award issued pursuant to this Section shall be binding between the disputing
parties and in respect of that particular case.

2.

Subject to paragraph 3, a disputing party shall recognise and comply with an award
without delay.

3.

A disputing party shall not seek enforcement of a final award until:
(a)

(b)

in the case of a final award issued under the ICSID Convention:
(i)

120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no
disputing party has requested revision or annulment of the award; or

(ii)

enforcement of the award has been stayed and revision or annulment
proceedings have been completed.

in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, or any other rules applicable pursuant to
Article 8. 23.2(d):
(i)

90 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no
disputing party has commenced a proceeding to revise, set aside or annul
the award; or

69

(ii)

enforcement of the award has been stayed and a court has dismissed or
allowed an application to revise, set aside or annul the award and there is
no further appeal.

4.

Execution of the award shall be governed by the laws concerning the execution of
judgments or awards in force where the execution is sought.

5.

A final award issued pursuant to this Section is an arbitral award that is deemed to
relate to claims arising out of a commercial relationship or transaction for the
purposes of Article I of the New York Convention.

6.

For greater certainty, if a claim has been submitted pursuant to Article 8.23.2(a), a
final award issued pursuant to this Section shall qualify as an award under Section 6
of the ICSID Convention.
Article 8.42
Role of the Parties

1.

A Party shall not bring an international claim, in respect of a claim submitted
pursuant to Article 8.23, unless the other Party has failed to abide by and comply
with the award rendered in that dispute.

2.

Paragraph 1 shall not exclude the possibility of dispute settlement under Chapter
Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement) in respect of a measure of general application
even if that measure is alleged to have breached this Agreement as regards a specific
investment in respect of which a claim has been submitted pursuant to Article 8.23
and is without prejudice to Article 8.38.

3.

Paragraph 1 does not preclude informal exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating
a settlement of the dispute.
Article 8.43
Consolidation

1.

When two or more claims that have been submitted separately pursuant to Article
8.23 have a question of law or fact in common and arise out of the same events or
circumstances, a disputing party or the disputing parties, jointly, may seek the
establishment of a separate division of the Tribunal pursuant to this Article and
request that such division issue a consolidation order (“request for consolidation”).

2.

The disputing party seeking a consolidation order shall first deliver a notice to the
disputing parties it seeks to be covered by this order.

3.

If the disputing parties notified pursuant to paragraph 2 have reached an agreement
on the consolidation order to be sought, they may make a joint request for the
establishment of a separate division of the Tribunal and a consolidation order
pursuant to this Article. If the disputing parties notified pursuant to paragraph 2 have
70

not reached agreement on the consolidation order to be sought within 30 days of the
notice, a disputing party may make a request for the establishment of a separate
division of the Tribunal and a consolidation order pursuant to this Article.
4.

The request shall be delivered, in writing, to the President of the Tribunal and to all
the disputing parties sought to be covered by the order, and shall specify:
(a)

the names and addresses of the disputing parties sought to be covered by the
order;

(b)

the claims, or parts thereof, sought to be covered by the order; and

(c)

the grounds for the order sought.

5.

A request for consolidation involving more than one respondent shall require the
agreement of all such respondents.

6.

The rules applicable to the proceedings under this Article are determined as follows:
(a)

if all of the claims for which a consolidation order is sought have been
submitted to dispute settlement under the same rules pursuant to Article 8.23,
these rules shall apply;

(b)

if the claims for which a consolidation order is sought have not been submitted
to dispute settlement under the same rules:
(i)

the investors may collectively agree on the rules pursuant to Article
8.23.2; or

(ii)

if the investors cannot agree on the applicable rules within 30 days of the
President of the Tribunal receiving the request for consolidation, the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules shall apply.

7.

The President of the Tribunal shall, after receipt of a consolidation request and in
accordance with the requirements of Article 8.27.7 constitute a new division (
“consolidating division”) of the Tribunal which shall have jurisdiction over some or
all of the claims, in whole or in part, which are the subject of the joint consolidation
request.8.
If, after hearing the disputing parties, a consolidating division is
satisfied that claims submitted pursuant to Article 8.23 have a question of law or fact
in common and arise out of the same events or circumstances, and consolidation
would best serve the interests of fair and efficient resolution of the claims including
the interest of consistency of awards, the consolidating division of the Tribunal may,
by order, assume jurisdiction over some or all of the claims, in whole or in part.

9.

If a consolidating division of the Tribunal has assumed jurisdiction pursuant to
paragraph 8, an investor that has submitted a claim pursuant to Article 8.23 and
whose claim has not been consolidated may make a written request to the Tribunal
that it be included in such order provided that the request complies with the
requirements set out in paragraph 4. The consolidating division of the Tribunal shall
grant such order where it is satisfied that the conditions of paragraph 8 are met and
that granting such a request would not unduly burden or unfairly prejudice the
71

disputing parties or unduly disrupt the proceedings. Before consolidating division of
the Tribunal issues that order, it shall consult with the disputing parties.
10.

On application of a disputing party, a consolidating division of the Tribunal
established under this Article, pending its decision under paragraph 8, may order that
the proceedings of a Tribunal appointed under Article 8.27,7 be stayed unless the
latter Tribunal has already adjourned its proceedings.

11.

A Tribunal appointed under Article 8.27,7 shall cede jurisdiction in relation to the
claims, or parts thereof, over which a consolidating division of the Tribunal
established under this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

12.

The award of a consolidating division of the Tribunal established under this Article
in relation to those claims, or parts thereof, over which it has assumed jurisdiction is
binding on a Tribunal appointed under Article 8.27,7 as regards those claims, or
parts thereof.

13.

An investor may withdraw a claim under this Section that is subject to consolidation
and such claim shall not be resubmitted pursuant to Article 8.23. If it does so no later
than 15 days after receipt of the notice of consolidation, its earlier submission of the
claim shall not prevent the investor’s recourse to dispute settlement other than under
this Section.

14.

At the request of an investor, a consolidating division of the Tribunal may take such
measures as it sees fit in order to preserve the confidential or protected information
of that investor in relation to other investors. Those measures may include the
submission of redacted versions of documents containing confidential or protected
information to the other investors or arrangements to hold parts of the hearing in
private.
Article 8.44
Committee on Services and Investment

1.

2.

The Committee on Services and Investment shall provide a forum for the Parties to
consult on issues related to this Chapter, including:
(a)

difficulties which may arise in the implementation of this Chapter;

(b)

possible improvements of this Chapter, in particular in the light of experience
and developments in other international fora and under the Parties’ other
agreements.

The Committee on Services and Investment shall, on agreement of the Parties, and
after completion of their respective internal requirements and procedures, adopt a
code of conduct for the Members of the Tribunal to be applied in disputes arising out
of this Chapter, which may replace or supplement the rules in application, and may
address topics including:

72

(a)

disclosure obligations;

(b)

the independence and impartiality of the Members of the Tribunal; and

(c)

confidentiality.

The Parties shall make best efforts to ensure that the code of conduct is adopted no
later than the first day of the provisional application or entry into force of this
Agreement, as the case may be, and in any event no later than two years after such
date.
3.

The Committee Services and Investment may, on agreement of the Parties, and after
completion of their respective internal requirements and procedures:
(a)

recommend to the CETA Joint Committee the adoption of interpretations of
this Agreement pursuant to Article 8.31.3;

(b)

adopt and amend rules supplementing the applicable dispute settlement rules,
and amend the applicable rules on transparency. These rules and amendments
are binding on a Tribunal established under this Section;

(c)

adopt rules for mediation for use by disputing parties as referred to in Article
8.20;

(d)

recommend to the CETA Joint Committee the adoption of any further elements
of the fair and equitable treatment obligation pursuant to Article 8.10.4; and

(e)

make recommendations to the CETA Joint Committee on the functioning of
the Appellate Tribunal pursuant to Article 8.28.8.

Article 8.45
Exclusion
The dispute settlement provisions of this Section and of Chapter Twenty-Nine (Dispute
Settlement) do not apply to the matters referred to in Annex 8-C.

73

CHAPTER NINE
CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES
Article 9.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
aircraft repair and maintenance services means activities undertaken on an aircraft or a
part of an aircraft while it is withdrawn from service and do not include so-called line
maintenance;
airport operation services means the operation or management, on a fee or contract basis, of
airport infrastructure, including terminals, runways, taxiways and aprons, parking facilities,
and intra-airport transportation systems. For greater certainty, airport operation services do
not include the ownership of, or investment in, airports or airport lands, or any of the
functions carried out by a board of directors. Airport operation services do not include air
navigation services;
computer reservation system services means the supply of a service by computerised
systems that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and fare
rules, through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;
cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a
service:
(a)

from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party; or

(b)

in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other Party,

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a person of the other
Party.
ground handling services means the supply of a service on a fee or contract basis for: ground
administration and supervision, including load control and communications; passenger
handling; baggage handling; cargo and mail handling; ramp handling and aircraft services;
fuel and oil handling; aircraft line maintenance, flight operations and crew administration;
surface transport; or catering services. Ground handling services do not include security
services or the operation or management of centralised airport infrastructure, such as baggage
handling systems, de-icing facilities, fuel distribution systems, or intra-airport transport
systems;
selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the air carrier
concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of marketing
such as market research, advertising and distribution, but do not include the pricing of air
transport services or the applicable conditions;
services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service that is not
supplied on a commercial basis, or in competition with one or more service suppliers;

74

Article 9.2
Scope
1.

2.

This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party affecting crossborder trade in services by a service supplier of the other Party, including a measure
affecting:
(a)

the production, distribution, marketing, sale, and delivery of a service;

(b)

the purchase of, use of, or payment for, a service; and,

(c)

the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services
which are required to be offered to the public generally.

This Chapter does not apply to a measure affecting:
(a)

services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;

(b)

for the European Union, audio-visual services;

(c)

for Canada, cultural industries;

(d)

financial services as defined in Article 13.1 (Definitions);

(e)

air services, related services in support of air services and other services
supplied by means of air transport11, other than:
(i)

aircraft repair and maintenance services;

(ii)

the selling and marketing of air transport services;

(iii) computer reservation system (CRS) services;
(iv) ground handling services;
(v)

airport operation services;

(f)

procurement by a Party of a good or service purchased for governmental
purposes, and not with of a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in
the supply of a good or service for commercial sale, whether or not that
procurement is "covered procurement" within the meaning of Article 19.2.2
(Scope and coverage); or

(g)

a subsidy, or other government support relating to cross-border trade in
services, provided by a Party.

3.

This Chapter does not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under the
Agreement on Air Transport between Canada and the European Community and its
Member States, done at Brussels on 17 December 2009 and Ottawa on 18 December
2009.

4.

This Chapter does not impose an obligation on a Party with respect to a national of
the other Party seeking access to its employment market, or employment on a

11

These services include services when an aircraft is being used to carry out specialised activities in
sectors including agriculture, construction, photography, surveying, mapping, forestry, observation and
patrol, or advertising, if the specialised activity is provided by the person that is responsible for the
operation of the aircraft.

75

permanent basis in its territory, or confer any right on that national with respect to
that access or employment.
Article 9.3
National treatment
1.

Each Party shall accord to service suppliers and services of the other Party treatment
no less favourable than that it accords, in like situations, to its own service suppliers
and services.

2.

For greater certainty, the treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1
means, with respect to a government in Canada other than at the federal level, or,
with respect to a government of or in a Member State of the European Union,
treatment no less favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded, in like
situations, by that government to its own service suppliers and services.
Article 9.4
Formal requirements

Article 9.3 does not prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes
formal requirements in connection with the supply of a service, provided that such
requirements are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination. These measures include requirements:
(a)

to obtain a licence, registration, certification, or authorisation in order to supply a
service or as a membership requirement of a particular profession, such as requiring
membership in a professional organisation or participation in collective
compensation funds for members of professional organisations;

(b)

for a service supplier to have a local agent for service or maintain a local address;

(c)

to speak a national language or hold a driver’s licence; or

(d)

that a service supplier:
(i)

post a bond or other form of financial security;

(ii)

establish or contribute to a trust account;

(iii) maintain a particular type and amount of insurance;
(iv) provide other similar guarantees; or
(v)

provide access to records.
Article 9.5
Most-favoured-nation treatment

1.

Each Party shall accord to service suppliers and services of the other Party treatment
no less favourable than that it accords, in like situations, to service suppliers and
services of a third country.

2.

For greater certainty, the treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1
means, with respect to a government in Canada other than at the federal level, or,
76

with respect to a government of or in a Member State of the European Union, the
treatment accorded, in like situations, by that government in its territory to services
or service suppliers of a third country.
3.

Paragraph 1 does not apply to treatment accorded by a Party under an existing or
future measure providing for recognition, including through an arrangement or
agreement with a third country that recognises the accreditation of testing and
analysis services and service suppliers, the accreditation of repair and maintenance
services and service suppliers, as well as the certification of the qualifications of, or
the results of, or work done by, those accredited services and service suppliers.
Article 9.6
Market access

A Party shall not adopt or maintain, on the basis of its entire territory or on the basis of the
territory of a national, provincial, territorial, regional or local level of government, a measure
that imposes limitations on:
(a)

the number of service suppliers, whether in the form of numerical quotas,
monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs
test;

(b)

the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test; or

(c)

the total number of service operations or the total quantity of service output
expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test.
Article 9.7
Reservations

1.

Articles 9.3, 9.5 and 9.6 do not apply to:
(a)

an existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the level
of:
(i)

the European Union, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii)

a national government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(iii) a provincial, territorial, or regional government, as set out by that Party in
its Schedule to Annex I; or
(iv) a local government.
(b)

the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a); or

(c)

an amendment to a non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to
the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Articles 9.3,
9.5, and 9.6.

77

2.

Articles 9.3, 9.3, and 9.6 do not apply to a measure that a Party adopts or maintains
with respect to a sector, subsector or activity, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.
Article 9.8
Denial of benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of the other Party that is an
enterprise of that Party and to services of that service supplier if:
(a)

a service supplier of a third country owns or controls the enterprise; and

(b)

the denying Party adopts or maintains a measure with respect to the third country
that:
(i)

relates to maintenance of international peace and security; and

(ii)

prohibits transactions with the enterprise or would be violated or circumvented
if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded to the enterprise.

78

CHAPTER TEN
TEMPORARY ENTRY AND STAY OF NATURAL PERSONS FOR BUSINESS
PURPOSES
Article 10.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
contractual services suppliers means natural persons employed by an enterprise of one Party
that have no establishment in the territory of the other Party and that have concluded a bona
fide contract (other than through an agency as defined by CPC 872) to supply a service to a
consumer of the other Party that requires the presence on a temporary basis of its employees
in the territory of the other Party in order to fulfil the contract to supply a service;
enterprise means an “enterprise” as defined in Article 8.1 (Definitions);
independent professionals means natural persons engaged in the supply of a service and
established as self-employed in the territory of a Party who have no establishment in the
territory of the other Party and who have concluded a bona fide contract (other than through
an agency as defined by CPC 872) to supply a service to a consumer of the other Party that
requires the presence of the natural person on a temporary basis in the territory of the other
Party in order to fulfil the contract to supply a service;
key personnel means business visitors for investment purposes, investors, or intra-corporate
transferees:
(a)

business visitors for investment purposes means natural persons working in a
managerial or specialist position who are responsible for setting up an
enterprise but who do not engage in direct transactions with the general public
and do not receive remuneration from a source located within the territory of
the host Party;

(b)

investors means natural persons who establish, develop, or administer the
operation of an investment in a capacity that is supervisory or executive, and to
which those persons or the enterprise employing those persons has committed,
or is in the process of committing, a substantial amount of capital; and

(c)

intra-corporate transferees means natural persons who have been employed
by an enterprise of a Party or have been partners in an enterprise of a Party for
at least one year and who are temporarily transferred to an enterprise (that may
be a subsidiary, branch, or head company of the enterprise of a Party) in the
territory of the other Party. This natural person must belong to one of the
following categories:
(i)

senior personnel means natural persons working in a senior position
within an enterprise who:
(A) primarily direct the management of the enterprise or direct the
enterprise, or a department or sub-division of the enterprise; and

79

(B)

(ii)

exercise wide latitude in decision making, which may include
having the authority to personally recruit and dismiss or to take
other personnel actions (such as promotion or leave authorisations),
and
(I)

receive only general supervision or direction principally from
higher level executives, the board of directors, or
stockholders of the business or their equivalent; or

(II)

supervise and control the work of other supervisory,
professional or managerial employees and exercise
discretionary authority over day-to-day operations; or

specialists means natural persons working in an enterprise who possess:
(A) uncommon knowledge of the enterprise’s products or services and
its application in international markets; or
(B)

an advanced level of expertise or knowledge of the enterprise’s
processes and procedures such as its production, research
equipment, techniques, or management.

In assessing such expertise or knowledge, the Parties will consider abilities that
are unusual and different from those generally found in a particular industry
and that cannot be easily transferred to another natural person in the short-term.
Those abilities would have been obtained through specific academic
qualifications or extensive experience with the enterprise; or
(iii) graduate trainees means natural persons who:
(A) possess a university degree; and
(B)

are temporarily transferred to an enterprise in the territory of the
other Party for career development purposes, or to obtain training
in business techniques or methods; and

natural persons for business purposes means key personnel, contractual services suppliers,
independent professionals, or short-term business visitors who are citizens of a Party.
Article 10.2
Objectives and scope
1.

This Chapter reflects the preferential trading relationship between the Parties as well
as the mutual objective to facilitate trade in services and investment by allowing
temporary entry and stay to natural persons for business purposes and by ensuring
transparency in the process.

2.

This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party concerning the
temporary entry and stay into its territory of key personnel, contractual services
suppliers, independent professionals and short-term business visitors. This Chapter
shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of a Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship,
residence, or employment on a permanent basis.

80

3.

Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the
entry of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those
measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of
natural persons across its borders, provided that such measures are not applied in
such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to any Party under the
terms of this Chapter. The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of a certain
country and not for those of others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing
benefits under this Chapter.

4.

To the extent that commitments are not taken in this Chapter, all other requirements
of the laws of the Parties regarding entry and stay continue to apply, including those
concerning period of stay.

5.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, all requirements of the Parties’ laws
regarding employment and social security measures shall continue to apply,
including regulations concerning minimum wages as well as collective wage
agreements.

6.

This Chapter does not apply to cases where the intent or effect of the temporary entry
and stay is to interfere with or otherwise affect the outcome of a labour or
management dispute or negotiation, or the employment of natural persons who are
involved in such dispute or negotiation.
Article 10.3
General obligations

1.

Each Party shall allow temporary entry to natural persons for business purposes of
the other Party who otherwise complies with the Party’s immigration measures
applicable to temporary entry, in accordance with this Chapter.

2.

Each Party shall apply its measures relating to the provisions of this Chapter in
accordance with Article 10.2.1, and, in particular, shall apply those measures so as to
avoid unduly impairing or delaying trade in goods or services or the conduct of
investment activities under this Agreement.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that any fees for processing applications for temporary entry
is reasonable and commensurate with the costs incurred.
Article 10.4
Provision of information

1.

Further to Chapter Twenty-Seven (Transparency), and recognising the importance to
the Parties of transparency of temporary entry information, each Party shall, no later
than 180 days after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, make available to
the other Party explanatory material regarding the requirements for temporary entry
under this Chapter that enables business persons of the other Party to be acquainted
with those requirements.

2.

If a Party collects and maintains data relating to temporary entry by category of
business persons under this Chapter, the Party shall make this data available to the

81

other Party on request, in accordance with its law related to privacy and data
protection.
Article 10.5
Contact points
1.

The Parties hereby establish the following contact points:
(a)

in the case of Canada:
Director
Temporary Resident Policy
Immigration Branch
Citizenship and Immigration Canada

(b)

in the case of the European Union:
Director-General
Directorate General for Trade
European Commission

(c)
2.

in the case of the Member States of the European Union, the contact points
listed in Annex10-A or their respective successors.

The contact points for Canada and the European Union, and as appropriate the
contact points for Member States of the European Union, shall exchange information
pursuant to Article 10.4 and shall meet as required to consider matters pertaining to
this Chapter, such as:
(a)

the implementation and administration of this Chapter, including the practice
of the Parties in allowing temporary entry;

(b)

the development and adoption of common criteria as well as interpretations for
the implementation of this Chapter;

(c)

the development of measures to further facilitate temporary entry of business
persons; and

(d)

recommendations to the CETA Joint Committee concerning this Chapter.
Article 10.6
Obligations in other chapters

1.

This Agreement does not impose an obligation on a Party regarding its immigration
measures, except as specifically identified in this Chapter and in Chapter TwentySeven (Transparency).

2.

Without prejudice to any decision to allow temporary entry to natural persons of the
other Party within the terms of this Chapter, including the length of stay permissible
pursuant to such an allowance:

82

(a)

(b)

Articles 9.3 (National treatment) and 9.6 (Market access), subject to Articles
9.4 (Formal requirements) and 9.2 (Scope) but not Article 9.2.2(d), are
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter and apply to the treatment of
natural persons for business purposes present in the territory of the other Party
under the categories of:
(i)

key personnel; and

(ii)

contractual services suppliers, and independent professionals for all
sectors listed in Annex 10-E; and

Article 9.5 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), subject to Articles 9.4 (Formal
requirements) and 9.2 (Scope) but not Article 9.2.2(d), is incorporated into and
made part of this Chapter and applies to the treatment of natural persons for
business purposes present in the territory of the other Party under the categories
of:
(i)

key personnel, contractual
professionals; and

services

suppliers,

(ii)

short-term business visitors, as set out in Article 10.9.

and

independent

3.

For greater certainty, paragraph 2 applies to the treatment of natural persons for
business purposes present in the territory of the other Party and falling within the
relevant categories and who is supplying financial services, as defined in Article 13.1
(Definitions) of Chapter Thirteen (Financial Services). Paragraph 2 does not apply to
measures relating to the granting of temporary entry to natural persons of a Party or
of a third country.

4.

If a Party has set out a reservation in its Schedule to Annex I, II or III, the reservation
also constitutes a reservation to paragraph 2, to the extent that the measure set out in
or permitted by the reservation affects the treatment of natural persons for business
purposes present in the territory of the other Party.
Article 10.7
Key personnel

1.

Each Party shall allow the temporary entry and stay of key personnel of the other
Party subject to the reservations and exceptions listed in Annex 10-B.

2.

Each Party shall not adopt or maintain limitations on the total number of key
personnel of the other Party allowed temporary entry, in the form of a numerical
restriction or an economic needs test.

3.

Each Party shall allow the temporary entry of business visitors for investment
purposes without requiring a work permit or other prior approval procedure of
similar intent.

4.

Each Party shall allow the temporary employment in its territory of intra-corporate
transferees and investors of the other Party.

5.

The permissible length of stay of key personnel is as follows:

83

(a)

intra-corporate transferees (specialists and senior personnel): the lesser of three
years or the length of the contract, with a possible extension of up to 18 months
at the discretion of the Party granting the temporary entry and stay12;

(b)

intra-corporate transferees (graduate trainees): the lesser of one year or the
length of the contract;

(c)

investors: one year, with possible extensions at the discretion of the Party
granting the temporary entry and stay;

(d)

business visitors for investment purposes: 90 days within any six month
period13.
Article 10.8
Contractual services suppliers and independent professionals

1.

In accordance with Annex 10-E, each Party shall allow the temporary entry and stay
of contractual services suppliers of the other Party, subject to the following
conditions:
(a)

the natural persons must be engaged in the supply of a service on a temporary
basis as employee of an enterprise which has obtained a service contract for a
period not exceeding 12 months. If the service contract is longer than 12
months, the commitments in this Chapter only apply for the initial 12 months
of the contract;

(b)

the natural persons entering the territory of the other Party must be offering
those services as an employee of the enterprise supplying the services for at
least the year immediately preceding the date of submission of an application
for entry into the territory of the other Party and must possess, at the date of the
submission, at least three years of professional experience14 in the sector of
activity that is the subject of the contract;

(c)

the natural persons entering the territory of the other Party must possess,

(d)

12

13

14
15

(i)

a university degree or a qualification demonstrating knowledge of an
equivalent level;15 and

(ii)

professional qualifications, if this is required to practice an activity
pursuant to the law, regulations, or requirements of the Party where the
service is supplied;

the natural persons must not receive remuneration for the provision of services
other than the remuneration paid by the enterprise employing the contractual
services suppliers during their stay in the territory of the other Party;

The length of stay permitted under this Chapter may not be taken into consideration in the context of an
application for citizenship in a Member State of the European Union.
This is without prejudice to the rights granted to Canada under bilateral visa waivers by Member States
of the European Union
The professional experience must have been obtained after having reached the age of majority.
If the degree or qualification has not been obtained in the Party where the service is supplied, that Party
may evaluate whether it is equivalent to a university degree required in its territory. The Parties shall
apply Annex 10-C, subject to the reservations in Annex 10-E, for the purposes of assessing such
equivalence.

84

2.

(e)

the temporary entry and stay accorded under this Article relate only to the
supply of a service which is the subject of the contract. Entitlement to utilise
the professional title of the Party where the service is provided may be granted,
as required, by the relevant authority as defined in Article 11.1 (Definitions),
through a Mutual Recognition Agreement (“MRA”) or otherwise; and

(f)

the service contract must comply with the laws, regulations, and other legal
requirements of the Party where the contract is executed.16

In accordance with Annex 10-E, each Party shall allow the temporary entry and stay
of independent professionals of the other Party, subject to the following conditions:
(a)

the natural persons must be engaged in the supply of a service on a temporary
basis as self-employed persons established in the other Party and must have
obtained a service contract for a period not exceeding 12 months. If the service
contract is longer than 12 months, the commitments in this Chapter shall only
apply for the initial 12 months of the contract;

(b)

the natural persons entering the territory of the other Party must possess, at the
date of submission of an application for entry into the other Party, at least six
years professional experience in the sector of activity which is the subject of
the contract;

(c)

the natural persons entering the territory of the other Party must possess,
(i)

a university degree or a qualification demonstrating knowledge of an
equivalent level;17 and

(ii)

professional qualifications, if this is required to practice an activity
pursuant to the laws, or requirements of the Party where the service is
supplied;

(d)

the temporary entry and stay accorded under the provisions of this Article
relate only to the supply of a service which is the subject of the contract.
Entitlement to utilise the professional title of the Party where the service is
provided may be granted, as required, by the relevant authority as defined in
Article 11.1 (Definitions), through an MRA or otherwise; and

(e)

the service contract must comply with the laws and other legal requirements of
the Party where the contract is executed.

3.

Unless otherwise specified in Annex 10-E, a Party shall not adopt or maintain a
limitation on the total number of contractual services suppliers and independent
professionals of the other Party allowed temporary entry, in the form of numerical
restrictions or an economic needs test.

4.

The length of stay of contractual services supplier or independent professionals is for
a cumulative period of not more than 12 months, with extensions possible at the

16

17

For greater certainty, the natural person must be engaged by the enterprise for the fulfilment of the
services contract pursuant to which temporary entry is sought.
If the degree or qualification was not obtained in the Party where the service is supplied, that Party may
evaluate whether it is equivalent to a university degree required in its territory. The Parties shall apply
Annex 10-C, subject to the reservations in Annex 10-E, for the purposes of assessing such equivalence.

85

discretion of the Party, in any 24 month period or for the duration of the contract,
whichever is less.
Article 10.9
Short-term business visitors
1.

In accordance with Annex 10-B, a Party shall allow the temporary entry and stay of
short-term business visitors of the other Party for the purposes of carrying out the
activities listed in Annex 10-D, provided that the short-term business visitors:
(a)

are not engaged in selling a good or a service to the general public;

(b)

do not on their own behalf receive remuneration from a source located within
the Party where the short-term business visitors are staying temporarily; and

(c)

are not engaged in the supply of a service in the framework of a contract
concluded between an enterprise that has no commercial presence in the
territory of the Party where the short-term visitors for business purposes are
staying temporarily, and a consumer in that territory, except as provided in
Annex 10-D.

2.

Each Party shall allow temporary entry of short-term business visitors without the
requirement of a work permit or other prior approval procedures of similar intent.

3.

The maximum length of stay of short-term business visitors is 90 days in any sixmonth period.18
Article 10.10
Review of commitments

Within five years following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall consider
updating their respective commitments under Articles 10.7 through 10.9.

18

This is without prejudice to the rights granted under bilateral visa waivers by Member States of the
European Union.

86

CHAPTER ELEVEN
MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
Article 11.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
jurisdiction means the territory of Canada, and each of its provinces and territories, or the
territory of each of the Member States of the European Union, in so far as this Agreement
applies in these territories in accordance with Article 1.3 (Geographical scope of application);
negotiating entity means a person or body of a Party entitled or empowered to negotiate an
agreement on the mutual recognition of professional qualifications (“MRA”);
professional experience means the effective and lawful practice of a service;
professional qualifications means the qualifications attested by evidence of formal
qualification and/or professional experience;
relevant authority means an authority or body, designated pursuant to legislative, regulatory
or administrative provisions to recognise qualifications and authorise the practice of a
profession in a jurisdiction; and
regulated profession means a service, the practice of which, including the use of a title or
designation, is subject to the possession of specific qualifications by virtue of legislative,
regulatory or administrative provisions.
Article 11.2
Objectives and scope
1.

This Chapter establishes a framework to facilitate a fair, transparent and consistent
regime for the mutual recognition of professional qualifications by the Parties and
sets out the general conditions for the negotiation of MRAs.

2.

This Chapter applies to professions which are regulated in each Party, including in
all or some Member States of the European Union and in all or some provinces and
territories of Canada.

3.

A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner that would constitute a means of
discrimination in the application of its criteria for the authorisation, licensing or
certification of a service supplier, or that would constitute a disguised restriction on
trade in services.

4.

An MRA adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall apply throughout the territories of
the European Union and Canada.
Article 11.3
Negotiation of an MRA

87

1.

Each Party shall encourage its relevant authorities or professional bodies, as
appropriate, to develop and provide to the Joint Committee on Mutual Recognition of
Professional Qualifications (“MRA Committee”) established under Article 26.2.1(b)
joint recommendations on proposed MRAs.

2.

A recommendation shall provide an assessment of the potential value of an MRA, on
the basis of criteria such as the existing level of market openness, industry needs, and
business opportunities, for example, the number of professionals likely to benefit
from the MRA, the existence of other MRAs in the sector, and expected gains in
terms of economic and business development. In addition, it shall provide an
assessment as to the compatibility of the licensing or qualification regimes of the
Parties and the intended approach for the negotiation of an MRA.

3.

The MRA Committee shall, within a reasonable period of time, review the
recommendation with a view to ensuring its consistency with the requirements of this
Chapter. If these requirements are satisfied, the MRA Committee shall establish the
necessary steps to negotiate and each Party shall inform its respective relevant
authorities of these steps.

4.

The negotiating entities shall thereafter pursue the negotiation and submit a draft
MRA text to the MRA Committee.

5.

The MRA Committee will thereafter review the draft MRA to ensure its consistency
with this Agreement.

6.

If in the view of the MRA Committee the MRA is consistent with this Agreement,
the MRA Committee shall adopt the MRA by means of a decision, which is
conditional upon subsequent notification to the MRA Committee by each Party of
the fulfilment of its respective internal requirements. The decision becomes binding
on the Parties upon that notification to the MRA Committee by each Party.
Article 11.4
Recognition

1.

The recognition of professional qualifications provided by an MRA shall allow the
service supplier to practice professional activities in the host jurisdiction, in
accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the MRA.

2.

If the professional qualifications of a service supplier of a Party are recognised by the
other Party pursuant to an MRA, the relevant authorities of the host jurisdiction shall
accord to this service supplier treatment no less favourable than that accorded in like
situations to a like service supplier whose professional qualifications have been
certified or attested in the Party’s own jurisdiction.

3.

Recognition under an MRA cannot be conditioned upon:
(a)

a service supplier meeting a citizenship or any form of residency requirement;
or

(b)

a service supplier’s education, experience or training having been acquired in
the Party’s own jurisdiction.

88

Article 11.5
Joint Committee on Mutual Recognition of Professional Qualifications
The MRA Committee responsible for the implementation of Article 11.3 shall:
(a)

be composed of and co-chaired by representatives of Canada and the European
Union, which must be different from the relevant authorities or professional bodies
referred to in Article 11.3.1. A list of those representatives shall be confirmed
through an exchange of letters;

(b)

meet within one year after this Agreement enters into force, and thereafter as
necessary or as decided;

(c)

determine its own rules of procedure;

(d)

facilitate the exchange of information regarding laws, regulations, policies and
practices concerning standards or criteria for the authorisation, licensing or
certification of regulated professions;

(e)

make publicly available information regarding the negotiation and implementation of
MRAs;

(f)

report to the CETA Joint Committee on the progress of the negotiation and
implementation of MRAs; and

(g)

as appropriate, provide information and complement the guidelines set out in Annex
11-A.
Article 11.6
Guidelines for the negotiation and conclusion of MRAs

As part of the framework to achieve mutual recognition of qualifications, the Parties set out in
Annex 11-A non-binding guidelines with respect to the negotiation and conclusion of MRAs.
Article 11.7
Contact points
Each Party shall establish one or more contact points for the administration of this Chapter.

89

CHAPTER TWELVE
DOMESTIC REGULATION
Article 12.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
authorisation means the granting of permission to a person to supply a service or to pursue
any other economic activity;
competent authority means any government of a Party, or non-governmental body in the
exercise of powers delegated by any government of a Party, that grants an authorisation;
licensing procedures means administrative or procedural rules, including for the amendment
or renewal of a licence, that must be adhered to in order to demonstrate compliance with
licensing requirements;
licensing requirements means substantive requirements, other than qualification
requirements, that must be complied with in order to obtain, amend or renew an authorisation;
qualification procedures means administrative or procedural rules that must be adhered to in
order to demonstrate compliance with qualification requirements; and
qualification requirements means substantive requirements relating to competency that must
be complied with in order to obtain, amend or renew an authorisation.
Article 12.2
Scope
1.

2.

This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to
licensing requirements, licensing procedures, qualification requirements, or
qualification procedures that affect:
(a)

the cross-border supply of services as defined in Article 9.1 (Definitions);

(b)

the supply of a service or pursuit of any other economic activity, through
commercial presence in the territory of the other Party, including the
establishment of such commercial presence; and

(c)

the supply of a service through the presence of a natural person of the other
Party in the territory of the Party, in accordance with Article 10.6.2
(Obligations in other chapters).

This Chapter does not apply to licensing requirements, licensing procedures,
qualification requirements, or qualification procedures:
(a)

pursuant to an existing non-conforming measure maintained by a Party as set
out in its Schedule to Annex I; or

(b)

relating to one of the following sectors or activities:

90

(i)

for Canada, cultural industries and, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II,
social services, aboriginal affairs, minority affairs, gambling and betting
services, and the collection, purification, and distribution of water; and

(ii)

for the European Union, audio-visual services and, as set out in its
Schedule to Annex II, health, education, and social services, gambling
and betting services,19 and the collection, purification, and distribution of
water.
Article 12.3

Licensing and qualification requirements and procedures
1.

Each Party shall ensure that licensing requirements, qualification requirements,
licensing procedures, or qualification procedures it adopts or maintains are based on
criteria that preclude the competent authority from exercising its power of
assessment in an arbitrary manner.

2.

The criteria referred to in paragraph 1 shall be:
(a)

clear and transparent;

(b)

objective; and

(c)

established in advance and made publicly accessible.

3.

The Parties recognise that the exercise of statutory discretion conferred on a minister
with respect to a decision on the granting of an authorisation in the public interest is
not inconsistent with sub-paragraph 2(c), provided that it is exercised consistently
with the object of the applicable statute and not in an arbitrary manner, and that its
exercise is not otherwise inconsistent with this Agreement.

4.

Paragraph 3 does not apply to licensing requirements, or qualification requirements
for a professional service.

5.

Each Party shall ensure that an authorisation is granted as soon as the competent
authority determines that the conditions for the authorisation have been met, and
once granted, that the authorisation enters into effect without undue delay, in
accordance with the terms and conditions specified therein.

6.

Each Party shall maintain or institute judicial, arbitral, or administrative tribunals or
procedures that provide for, at the request of an affected investor or service supplier,
as defined in Articles 8.1 (Definitions) and 9.1 (Definitions), a prompt review of, and
if justified, appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions affecting the supply of
a service or the pursuit of any other economic activity. If such procedures are not
independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, each
Party shall ensure that the procedures are applied in a way that provides for an
objective and impartial review.

7.

Each Party shall ensure that licensing procedures or qualification procedures it
adopts or maintains are as simple as possible, and do not unduly complicate or delay
the supply of a service, or the pursuit of any other economic activity.

19

With the exception of Malta.

91

8.

An authorisation fee that an applicant may incur in relation to its application for an
authorisation shall be reasonable and commensurate with the costs incurred, and
shall not in itself restrict the supply of a service or the pursuit of any other economic
activity.

9.

Authorisation fees do not include payments for auction, the use of natural resources,
royalties, tendering or other non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or
mandated contributions to provide a universal service.

10.

Each Party shall ensure that licensing procedures, or qualification procedures used by
the competent authority and decisions of the competent authority in the authorisation
process are impartial with respect to all applicants. The competent authority should
reach its decisions in an independent manner and in particular should not be
accountable to any person supplying a service or pursuing any other economic
activity for which the authorisation is required.

11.

If specific time periods for authorising applications exist, an applicant shall be
allowed a reasonable period for the submission of an application. The competent
authority shall initiate the processing of an application without undue delay. If
possible, applications should be accepted in electronic format under similar
conditions of authenticity as paper submissions.

12.

Authenticated copies should be accepted, if considered appropriate, in place of
original documents.

13.

Each Party shall ensure that the processing of an authorisation application, including
reaching a final decision, is completed within a reasonable timeframe from the
submission of a complete application. Each Party should establish the normal
timeframe for the processing of an application.

14.

At the request of an applicant, a Party’s competent authority shall provide, without
undue delay, information concerning the status of the application.

15.

If an application is considered incomplete, a Party’s competent authority shall, within
a reasonable period of time, inform the applicant, identify the additional information
required to complete the application, and provide the applicant an opportunity to
correct deficiencies.

16.

If a Party’s competent authority rejects an application, it shall inform the applicant in
writing and without undue delay. Upon request of the applicant, the Party’s
competent authority shall also inform the applicant of the reasons the application was
rejected and of the timeframe for an appeal or review against the decision. An
applicant should be permitted, within reasonable time limits, to resubmit an
application.

92

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Article 13.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
cross-border financial service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that is engaged
in the business of supplying a financial service within the territory of the Party and that seeks
to supply or supplies a financial service through the cross-border supply of that service;
cross-border supply of financial services or cross-border trade in financial services
means the supply of a financial service:
(a)

from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party; or

(b)

in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by an investment in that
territory;
financial institution means a supplier that carries out one or more of the operations defined
as being financial services in this Article, if the supplier is regulated or supervised in respect
of the supply of those services as a financial institution under the law of the Party in whose
territory it is located, including a branch in the territory of the Party of that financial service
supplier whose head offices are located in the territory of the other Party;
financial institution of the other Party means a financial institution, including a branch,
located in the territory of a Party that is controlled by a person of the other Party;
financial service means a service of a financial nature, including insurance and insurancerelated services, banking and other financial services (excluding insurance), and services
incidental or auxiliary to a service of a financial nature. Financial services include the
following activities:
(a)

insurance and insurance-related services
(i)

direct insurance (including co-insurance):
(A) life; or
(B)

(ii)

non-life;

reinsurance and retrocession;

(iii) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; or
(iv) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment,
and claim settlement services; and
(b)

banking and other financial services (excluding insurance):
(i)

acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

93

(ii)

lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring, and
financing of commercial transactions;

(iii) financial leasing;
(iv) all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and
debit cards, travellers cheques, and bankers drafts;
(v)

guarantees and commitments;

(vi) trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange,
in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:
(A) money market instruments (including cheques, bills or certificates of
deposits);
(B)

foreign exchange;

(C)

derivative products including futures and options;

(D) exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as
swaps and forward rate agreements;
(E)

transferable securities; or

(F)

other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion;

(vii) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent (whether publicly or privately), and supply of services
related to such issues;
(viii) money broking;
(ix) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of
collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial,
depository, and trust services;
(x)

settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;

(xi) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software; or
(xii) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the
activities listed in sub-sub-paragraphs (i) through (xi), including credit
reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, and
advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy;
financial service supplier means a person of a Party that is engaged in the business of
supplying a financial service within the territory of that Party but does not include a public
entity;
investment means “investment” as defined in Article 8.1 (Definitions), except that for the
purposes of this Chapter, with respect to “loans” and “debt instruments” referred to in that
Article:
(a)

a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution is an investment in that
financial institution only if it is treated as regulatory capital by the Party in whose
territory the financial institution is located; and
94

(b)

a loan granted by or debt instrument owned by a financial institution, other than a
loan to or debt instrument of a financial institution referred to in subparagraph (a), is
not an investment;

for greater certainty,
(c)

Chapter Eight (Investment) applies to a loan or debt instrument to the extent that it is
not covered in this Chapter; and

(d)

a loan granted by or a debt instrument owned by a cross-border financial service
supplier, other than a loan to or debt instrument issued by a financial institution, is an
investment for the purposes of Chapter Eight (Investment) if that loan or debt
instrument meets the criteria for investments set out in Article 8.1 (Definitions);

investor means “investor” as defined in Article 8.1 (Definitions);
new financial service means a financial service that is not supplied in the territory of a Party
but that is supplied in the territory of the other Party and includes any new form of delivery of
a financial service or the sale of a financial product that is not sold in the Party’s territory;
person of a Party means “person of a Party” as defined in Article 1.1 (Definitions of general
application) and, for greater certainty, does not include a branch of an enterprise of a third
country;
public entity means:
(a)

a government, a central bank or a monetary authority of a Party or any entity owned
or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in carrying out governmental
functions or activities for governmental purposes, but does not include an entity
principally engaged in supplying financial services on commercial terms; or

(b)

a private entity that performs functions normally performed by a central bank or
monetary authority when exercising those functions; and

self-regulatory organisation means a non-governmental body, including any securities or
futures exchange or market, clearing agency, other organisation or association, that exercises
its own or delegated regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service suppliers or
financial institutions.
Article 13.2
Scope
1.

2.

This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a)

financial institutions of the other Party;

(b)

an investor of the other Party, and an investment of that investor, in a financial
institution in the Party’s territory; and

(c)

cross-border trade in financial services.

For greater certainty, the provisions of Chapter Eight (Investment) apply to:
(a)

a measure relating to an investor of a Party, and an investment of that investor,
in a financial service supplier that is not a financial institution; and

95

(b)

a measure, other than a measure relating to the supply of financial services,
relating to an investor of a Party or an investment of that investor in a financial
institution.

3.

Articles 8.10 (Treatment of investors and of covered investments), 8.11
(Compensation for losses), 8.12 (Expropriation), 8.13 (Transfers), 8.14
(Subrogation), 8.16 (Denial of benefits), and 8.17 (Formal requirements) are
incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter.

4.

Section F of Chapter Eight (Resolution of investment disputes between investors and
states) is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter solely for claims that a
Party has breached Articles 13.3, or 13.4 with respect to the expansion, conduct,
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, and sale or disposal of a
financial institution or an investment in a financial institution, or Articles 8.10
(Treatment of investors and of covered investments), 8.11 (Compensation for losses),
8.12 (Expropriation), 8.13 (Transfers), or 8.16 (Denial of benefits).

5.

This Chapter does not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating
to:
(a)

activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or statutory
system of social security; or

(b)

activities or services conducted for the account of the Party, with the guarantee
or using the financial resources of the Party, including its public entities,

except that this Chapter applies to the extent that a Party allows activities or services
referred to in subparagraph (a) or (b) to be conducted by its financial institutions in
competition with a public entity or a financial institution.
6.

Chapter Twelve (Domestic Regulation) is incorporated into and made a part of this
Chapter. For greater certainty, Article 12.3 (Licensing and qualification requirements
and procedures) applies to the exercise of statutory discretion by the financial
regulatory authorities of the Parties.

7.

The provisions of Chapter Twelve (Domestic Regulation) incorporated into this
Chapter under paragraph 6 do not apply to licensing requirements, licensing
procedures, qualification requirements or qualification procedures:
(a)

pursuant to a non-conforming measure maintained by Canada, as set out in its
Schedule to Annex III-A;

(b)

pursuant to a non-conforming measure maintained by the European Union, as
set out in its Schedule to Annex I, to the extent that such measure relates to
financial services; and

(c)

as set out in Article 12.2.2(b) (Scope), to the extent that such measure relates to
financial services.
Article 13.3
National treatment

96

1.

Article 8.6 (National treatment) is incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter
and applies to treatment of financial institutions and investors of the other Party and
their investments in financial institutions.

2.

The treatment accorded by a Party to its own investors and investments of its own
investors under paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 8.6 (National treatment) means
treatment accorded to its own financial institutions and investments of its own
investors in financial institutions.
Article 13.4
Most-favoured-nation treatment

1.

Article 8.7 (Most-favoured-nation treatment) is incorporated into and made a part of
this Chapter and applies to treatment of financial institutions and investors of the
other Party and their investments in financial institutions.

2.

The treatment accorded by a Party to investors of a third country and investments of
investors of a third country under paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 8.7 (Most-favourednation treatment) means treatment accorded to financial institutions of a third country
and investments of investors of a third country in financial institutions.
Article 13.5
Recognition of prudential measures

1.

A Party may recognise a prudential measure of a third country in the application of a
measure covered by this Chapter. That recognition may be:
(a)

accorded unilaterally;

(b)

achieved through harmonisation or other means; or

(c)

based upon an agreement or arrangement with the third country.

2.

A Party according recognition of a prudential measure shall provide adequate
opportunity to the other Party to demonstrate that circumstances exist in which there
are or will be equivalent regulation, oversight, implementation of regulation and, if
appropriate, procedures concerning the sharing of information between the Parties.

3.

If a Party recognises a prudential measure under subparagraph 1(c) and the
circumstances described in paragraph 2 exist, the Party shall provide adequate
opportunity to the other Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or
arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement.
Article 13.6
Market access

1.

A Party shall not adopt or maintain, with respect to a financial institution of the other
Party or with respect to market access through establishment of a financial institution
by an investor of the other Party, on the basis of its entire territory or on the basis of
the territory of a national, provincial, territorial, regional, or local level of
government, a measure that:

97

(a)

imposes limitations on:
(i)

the number of financial institutions, whether in the form of numerical
quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an
economic needs test;

(ii)

the total value of financial service transactions or assets in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of financial service operations or the total quantity of
financial services output expressed in terms of designated numerical units
in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(iv) the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage limit
on foreign shareholding in financial institutions or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment in financial institutions; or
(v)

(b)

the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a particular
financial services sector or that a financial institution may employ and
who are necessary for, and directly related to, the performance of a
specific financial service in the form of numerical quotas or the
requirement of an economic needs test; or

restricts or requires specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which
a financial institution may perform an economic activity.

2.

Article 8.4.2 (Market access) is incorporated into and made a part of this Article.

3.

For greater certainty:
(a)

a Party may impose terms, conditions, and procedures for the authorisation of
the establishment and expansion of a commercial presence provided that they
do not circumvent the Party’s obligation under paragraph 1 and are consistent
with the other provisions of this Chapter; and

(b)

this Article does not prevent a Party from requiring a financial institution to
supply certain financial services through separate legal entities if, under the law
of the Party, the range of financial services supplied by the financial institution
may not be supplied through a single entity.
Article 13.7
Cross-border supply of financial services

1.

Articles 9.3 (National treatment), 9.4 (Formal requirements), and 9.6 (Market access)
are incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter and apply to treatment of crossborder financial service suppliers supplying the financial services specified in Annex
13-A.

2.

The treatment accorded by a Party to its own service suppliers and services under
Article 9.3.2 (National treatment) means treatment accorded to its own financial
service suppliers and financial services.

3.

The measures that a Party shall not adopt or maintain with respect to service
suppliers and services of the other Party under Article 9.6 (Market access) means

98

measures relating to cross-border financial service suppliers of the other Party
supplying financial services.
4.

Article 9.5 (Most-favoured-nation treatment) is incorporated into and made a part of
this Chapter and applies to treatment of cross-border financial service suppliers of
the other Party.

5.

The treatment accorded by a Party to service suppliers and services of a third country
under Article 9.5 (Most-favoured-nation treatment) means treatment accorded to
financial service suppliers of a third country and financial services of a third country.

6.

Each Party shall permit a person located in its territory, and a national wherever they
are located, to purchase a financial service from a cross-border financial service
supplier of the other Party located in the territory of that other Party. This obligation
does not require a Party to permit such suppliers to do business or solicit in its
territory. Each Party may define “doing business” and “solicitation” for the purposes
of this Article, in conformity with paragraph 1.

7.

For the financial services specified in Annex 13-A, each Party shall permit a crossborder financial service supplier of the other Party, on request or notification to the
relevant regulator, where required, to supply a financial service through any new
form of delivery, or to sell a financial product that is not sold in the Party’s territory
where the first Party permits its own financial service suppliers to supply such a
service or to sell such a product under its law in like situations.
Article 13.8
Senior management and boards of directors

A Party shall not require that a financial institution of the other Party appoint to senior
management or board of director positions, natural persons of any particular nationality.
Article 13.9
Performance requirements
1.

The Parties shall negotiate disciplines on performance requirements such as those
contained in Article 8.5 (Performance requirements) with respect to investments in
financial institutions.

2.

If, after three years of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties have not agreed
to such disciplines, upon request of a Party, Article 8.5 (Performance requirements)
shall be incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter and shall apply to
investments in financial institutions. For this purpose, “investment” in Article 8.5
(Performance requirements) means “investment in a financial institution in its
territory”.

3.

Within 180 days following the successful negotiation by the Parties on the
performance requirement disciplines pursuant to paragraph 1, or following a Party’s
request for incorporation of Article 8.5 (Performance requirements) into this Chapter
pursuant to paragraph 2, as the case may be, each Party may amend its Schedule as
required. Any amendment must be limited to the listing of reservations for existing
measures that do not conform with the performance requirements obligation under

99

this Chapter, for Canada in Section A of its Schedule to Annex III and for the
European Union in its Schedule to Annex I. Article 13.10.1 shall apply to such
measures with respect to the performance requirement disciplines negotiated
pursuant to paragraph 1, or Article 8.5 (Performance requirements) as incorporated
into this Chapter pursuant to paragraph 2, as the case may be.
Article 13.10
Reservations and exceptions
1.

Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.6, and 13.8 do not apply to:
(a)

an existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the level
of:
(i)

the European Union, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii)

a national government, as set out by Canada in Section A of its Schedule
to Annex III or the European Union in its Schedule to Annex I;

(iii) a provincial, territorial, or regional government, as set out by Canada in
Section A of its Schedule to Annex III or the European Union in its
Schedule to Annex I; or
(iv) a local government;

2.

(b)

the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a); or

(c)

an amendment to a non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to
the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Articles 13.3,
13.4, 13.6, or 13.8.

Article 13.7 does not apply to:
(a)

an existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the level
of:
(i)

the European Union, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii)

a national government, as set out by Canada in Section A of its Schedule
to Annex III or the European Union in its Schedule to Annex I;

(iii) a provincial, territorial, or regional government, as set out by Canada in
Section A of its Schedule to Annex III or the European Union in its
Schedule to Annex I; or
(iv) a local government;
(b)

the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming measure referred to in
sub-paragraph (a); or

(c)

an amendment to a non-conforming measure referred to in sub-paragraph (a) to
the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed upon the entry into force of this Agreement, with Article
13.7.

100

3.

Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.6, 13.7, and 13.8 do not apply to a measure that Canada
adopts or maintains with respect to financial services as set out in Section B of its
Schedule to Annex III, or to a measure that the European Union adopts or maintains
with respect to financial services as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.

4.

If a Party has set out a reservation to Articles 8.4 (Market access), 8.5 (Performance
requirements), 8.6 (National treatment), 8.7 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 8.8
(Senior management and boards of directors), 9.3 (National treatment), 9.5 (Mostfavoured-nation treatment), or 9.6 (Market access) in its Schedule to Annex I or II,
the reservation also constitutes a reservation to Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.6, 13.7, or
13.8, or to any discipline on performance requirements negotiated pursuant to Article
13.9.1 or incorporated into this Chapter pursuant to Article 13.9.2, as the case may
be, to the extent that the measure, sector, sub-sector or activity set out in the
reservation is covered by this Chapter.

5.

A Party shall not adopt a measure or series of measures after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement that are covered by Section B of Canada’s Schedule to
Annex III, or by the Schedule to Annex II of the European Union and that require,
directly or indirectly, an investor of the other Party, by reason of nationality, to sell
or otherwise dispose of an investment existing at the time the measure or series of
measures became effective.

6.

In respect of intellectual property rights, a Party may derogate from Articles 13.3 and
13.4, and from any discipline on technology transfer in relation to performance
requirements negotiated pursuant to Article 13.9.1 or incorporated into this Chapter
pursuant to Article 13.9.2, as the case may be, if the derogation is permitted by the
TRIPS Agreement, including waivers to the TRIPS Agreement adopted pursuant to
Article IX of the WTO Agreement.

7.

Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.6, 13.7, 13.8, and 13.9 do not apply to:
(a)

procurement by a Party of a good or service purchased for governmental
purposes and not with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use in the
supply of a goods or service for commercial sale, whether or not that
procurement is “covered procurement” within the meaning of Article 19.2
(Scope and coverage); or

(b)

subsidies, or government support relating to trade in services, provided by a
Party.
Article 13.11
Effective and transparent regulation

1.

Each Party shall ensure that all measures of general application to which this Chapter
applies are administered in a reasonable, objective, and impartial manner.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative
rulings of general application with respect to any matter covered by this Chapter are
promptly published or made available in such a manner as to enable an interested
person and the other Party to become acquainted with them. To the extent possible,
each Party shall:
(a)

publish in advance any such measures that it proposes to adopt;
101

(b)

provide an interested person and the other Party a reasonable opportunity to
comment on these proposed measures; and

(c)

allow reasonable time between the final publication of the measures and the
date they become effective.

For the purposes of this Chapter, these requirements replace those set out in Article
27.1 (Publication).
3.

Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms to respond within a
reasonable period of time to an inquiry from an interested person regarding measures
of general application covered by this Chapter.

4.

A regulatory authority shall make an administrative decision on a completed
application of an investor in a financial institution, a cross-border financial service
supplier, or a financial institution of the other Party relating to the supply of a
financial service within a reasonable period of time that is justified by the complexity
of the application and the normal period of time established for the processing of the
application. For Canada, such a reasonable time period is 120 days. The regulatory
authority shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision. If it is not practicable
for a decision to be made within a reasonable period of time, the regulatory authority
shall promptly notify the applicant and endeavour to make the decision as soon as
possible. For greater certainty, an application is not considered complete until all
relevant hearings are held and the regulatory authority has received all necessary
information.
Article 13.12
Self-regulatory organisations

If a Party requires a financial institution or a cross-border financial service supplier of the
other Party to be a member of, participate in, or have access to, a self-regulatory organisation
to supply a financial service in or into the territory of that Party, or grants a privilege or
advantage when supplying a financial service through a self-regulatory organisation, then the
requiring Party shall ensure that the self-regulatory organisation observes the obligations of
this Chapter.
Article 13.13
Payment and clearing systems
Under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party shall grant a financial
service supplier of the other Party established in its territory access to payment and clearing
systems operated by a Party, or by an entity exercising governmental authority delegated to it
by a Party, and access to official funding and refinancing facilities available in the normal
course of ordinary business. This Article does not confer access to a Party’s lender of last
resort facilities.
Article 13.14
New financial services

102

1.

Each Party shall permit a financial institution of the other Party to supply any new
financial service that the first Party would permit its own financial institutions, in
like situations, to supply under its law, on request or notification to the relevant
regulator, if required.

2.

A Party may determine the institutional and juridical form through which the new
financial service may be supplied and may require authorisation for the supply of the
service. If authorisation is required, a decision shall be made within a reasonable
period of time and the authorisation may only be refused for prudential reasons.

3.

This Article does not prevent a financial institution of a Party from applying to the
other Party to consider authorising the supply of a financial service that is not
supplied within either Party’s territory. That application is subject to the law of the
Party receiving the application and is not subject to the obligations of this Article.
Article 13.15
Transfer and processing of information

1.

Each Party shall permit a financial institution or a cross-border financial service
supplier of the other Party to transfer information in electronic or other form, into
and out of its territory, for data processing if processing is required in the ordinary
course of business of the financial institution or the cross-border financial service
supplier.

2.

Each Party shall maintain adequate safeguards to protect privacy, in particular with
regard to the transfer of personal information. If the transfer of financial information
involves personal information, such transfers should be in accordance with the
legislation governing the protection of personal information of the territory of the
Party where the transfer has originated.
Article 13.16
Prudential carve-out

1.

2.

This Agreement does not prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining reasonable
measures for prudential reasons, including:
(a)

the protection of investors, depositors, policy-holders, or persons to whom a
financial institution, cross-border financial service supplier, or financial service
supplier owes a fiduciary duty;

(b)

the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility
of a financial institution, cross-border financial service supplier, or financial
service supplier; or

(c)

ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party’s financial system.

Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in
financial services, a Party may require the registration of cross-border financial
service suppliers of the other Party and of financial instruments.

103

3.

Subject to Articles 13.3 and 13.4, a Party may, for prudential reasons, prohibit a
particular financial service or activity. Such a prohibition shall not apply to all
financial services or to a complete financial services sub-sector, such as banking.
Article 13.17
Specific exceptions

1.

This Agreement does not apply to measures taken by a public entity in pursuit of
monetary or exchange rate policies. This paragraph does not affect a Party’s
obligations under Articles 8.5 (Performance requirements), 8.13 (Transfers), or 13.9.

2.

This Agreement does not require a Party to furnish or allow access to information
relating to the affairs and accounts of individual consumers, cross-border financial
service suppliers, financial institutions, or to any confidential information which, if
disclosed, would interfere with specific regulatory, supervisory, or law enforcement
matters, or would otherwise be contrary to public interest or prejudice legitimate
commercial interests of particular enterprises.
Article 13.18
Financial Services Committee

1.

The Financial Services Committee established under Article 26.2.1(f) (Committee)
shall include representatives of authorities in charge of financial services policy with
expertise in the field covered by this Chapter. For Canada, the Committee
representative is an official from Finance Canada or its successor.

2.

The Financial Services Committee shall decide by mutual consent.

3.

The Financial Services Committee shall meet annually, or as it otherwise decides,
and shall:
(a)

supervise the implementation of this Chapter;

(b)

carry out a dialogue on the regulation of the financial services sector with a
view to improving mutual knowledge of the Parties’ respective regulatory
systems and to cooperate in the development of international standards as
illustrated by the Understanding on the dialogue on the regulation of the
financial services sector contained in Annex 13-B; and

(c)

implement Article 13.21.
Article 13.19
Consultations

1.

A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising
under this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall give
sympathetic consideration to the request.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that when there are consultations pursuant to paragraph 1 its
delegation includes officials with the relevant expertise in the area covered by this
Chapter. For Canada this means officials of Finance Canada or its successor.

104

Article 13.20
Dispute settlement
1.

Chapter Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement) applies as modified by this Article to the
settlement of disputes arising under this Chapter.

2.

If the Parties are unable to agree on the composition of the arbitration panel
established for the purposes of a dispute arising under this Chapter, Article 29.7
(Composition of the arbitration panel) applies. However, all references to the list of
arbitrators established under Article 29.8 (List of arbitrators) shall be understood to
refer to the list of arbitrators established under this Article.

3.

The CETA Joint Committee may establish a list of at least 15 individuals, chosen on
the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound judgement, who are willing and able to
serve as arbitrators. The list shall be composed of three sub-lists: one sub-list for
each Party and one sub-list of individuals, who are not nationals of either Party, to
act as chairpersons. Each sub-list shall include at least five individuals. The CETA
Joint Committee may review the list at any time and shall ensure that the list
conforms with this Article.

4.

The arbitrators included on the list must have expertise or experience in financial
services law or regulation or in the practice thereof, which may include the
regulation of financial service suppliers. The arbitrators acting as chairpersons must
also have experience as counsel, panellist, or arbitrator in dispute settlement
proceedings. Arbitrators shall be independent, serve in their individual capacity, and
shall not take instructions from any organisation or government. They shall comply
with the Code of Conduct in Annex 29-B (Code of conduct).

5.

If an arbitration panel finds that a measure is inconsistent with this Agreement and
the measure affects:
(a)

the financial services sector and any other sector, the complaining Party may
suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect equivalent
to the effect of the measure in the Party’s financial services sector; or

(b)

only a sector other than the financial services sector, the complaining Party
shall not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.
Article 13.21
Investment disputes in financial services

1.

Section F of Chapter Eight (Resolution of investment disputes between investors and
states) applies, as modified by this Article and Annex 13-B, to:
(a)

investment disputes pertaining to measures to which this Chapter applies and in
which an investor claims that a Party has breached Articles 8.10 (Treatment of
investors and of covered investments), 8.11 (Compensation for losses), 8.12
(Expropriation), 8.13 (Transfers), 8.16 (Denial of benefits), 13.3, or 13.4; or

(b)

investment disputes commenced pursuant to Section F of Chapter Eight
(Resolution of investment disputes between investors and states) in which
Article 13.16.1 has been invoked.

105

2.

In the case of an investment dispute under sub-paragraph 1(a), or if the respondent
invokes Article 13.16.1 within 60 days of the submission of a claim to the Tribunal
under Article 8.22 (Submission of a claim to the Tribunal), a division of the Tribunal
shall be composed, in accordance with Article 8.27.7 from the list established under
Article 13.20.3. If the respondent invokes Article 13.16.1 within 60 days of the
submission of a claim, with respect to an investment dispute other than under
subparagraph 1(a), the period of time applicable to the composition of a division of
the Tribunal under Article 8.27.7 (Constitution of the Tribunal) commences on the
date the respondent invokes Article 13.16.1. If the CETA Joint Committee has not
made the appointments pursuant to Article 8.27.2 within the period of time provided
in Article 8.27.17, either disputing party may request that the Secretary-General of
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) select the
Members of the Tribunal from the list established under Article 13.20. If the list has
not been established under Article 13.20 on the date the claim is submitted pursuant
to Article 8.23, the Secretary-General of ICSID shall select the Members of the
Tribunal from the individuals proposed by one or both of the Parties in accordance
with Article 13.20.

3.

The respondent may refer the matter in writing to the Financial Services Committee
for a decision as to whether and, if so, to what extent the exception under Article
13.16.1 is a valid defence to the claim. This referral shall not be made later than the
date the Tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial. If the
respondent refers the matter to the Financial Services Committee under this
paragraph the periods of time or proceedings referred to in Section F of Chapter
Eight (Resolution of investment disputes between investors and states) are
suspended.

4.

In a referral under paragraph 3, the Financial Services Committee or the CETA Joint
Committee, as the case may be, may make a joint determination as to whether and to
what extent Article 13.16.1 is a valid defence to the claim. The Financial Services
Committee or the CETA Joint Committee, as the case may be, shall transmit a copy
of the joint determination to the investor and the Tribunal, if constituted. If the joint
determination concludes that Article 13.16.1 is a valid defence to all parts of the
claim in their entirety, the investor is deemed to have withdrawn its claim and the
proceedings are discontinued in accordance with Article 8.35 (Discontinuance). If
the joint determination concludes that Article 13.16.1 is a valid defence to only parts
of the claim, the joint determination is binding on the Tribunal with respect to those
parts of the claim. The suspension of the periods of time or proceedings described in
paragraph 3 then no longer apply and the investor may proceed with the remaining
parts of the claim.

5.

If the CETA Joint Committee has not made a joint determination within three months
of referral of the matter by the Financial Services Committee, the suspension of the
periods of time or proceedings referred to in paragraph 3 no longer apply and the
investor may proceed with its claim.

6.

At the request of the respondent, the Tribunal shall decide as a preliminary matter
whether and to what extent Article 13.16.1 is a valid defence to the claim. Failure of
the respondent to make that request is without prejudice to the right of the respondent
to assert Article 13.16.1 as a defence in a later phase of the proceedings. The

106

Tribunal shall draw no adverse inference from the fact that the Financial Services
Committee or the CETA Joint Committee has not agreed on a joint determination in
accordance with Annex13-B.

107

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME TRANSPORT SERVICES
Article 14.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
customs clearance services or customs house brokers’ services means the carrying out, on
a fee or contract basis, of customs formalities concerning import, export or through transport
of cargo, irrespective of whether these services are the main or secondary activity of the
service provider;
container station and depot services means the storage, stuffing, stripping or repair of
containers and making them available for shipment, whether in port areas or inland;
door-to-door or multimodal transport operation means the transport of cargo under a
single transport document, that uses more than one mode of transport and involves an
international sea-leg;
feeder services means the pre- and onward transportation by sea of international cargo,
including containerised, break bulk and dry or liquid bulk cargo, between ports located in the
territory of a Party. For greater certainty, in respect of Canada, feeder services may include
transportation between sea and inland waters, where inland waters means those defined in the
Customs Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.1;
international cargo means cargo transported by sea-going vessels between a port of a Party
and a port of the other Party or of a third country, or between a port of one Member State of
the European Union and a port of another Member State of the European Union;
international maritime transport services means the transport of passengers or cargo by a
sea-going vessel between a port of one Party and a port of the other Party or of a third
country, or between a port of one Member State of the European Union and a port of another
Member State of the European Union, as well as direct contracting with suppliers of other
transport services to ensure door-to-door or multimodal transport operations, but not the
supply of such other transport services;
international maritime transport service suppliers means
(a)

an enterprise of a Party, as defined in Article 1.1 (Definitions of general application),
and a branch of any such entity; or

(b)

an enterprise, as defined in Article 1.1 (Definitions of general application), of a third
country owned or controlled by nationals of a Party, if its vessels are registered in
accordance with the legislation of that Party and flying the flag of that Party; or

(c)

a branch of an enterprise of a third country with substantive business operations in
the territory of a Party, that is engaged in the supply of international maritime
transport services. For greater certainty, Chapter Eight (Investment) does not apply to
such a branch;

108

maritime agency services means the representation, as an agent, within a given geographic
area, of the business interests of one or more shipping lines or shipping companies, for the
following purposes:
(a)

marketing and sales of maritime transport and related services, from quotation to
invoicing, issuance of bills of lading on behalf of the companies, acquisition and
resale of the necessary related services, preparation of documentation, and provision
of business information; and

(b)

acting on behalf of the companies in organising the call of the vessel or taking
control of cargo when required;

maritime auxiliary services means maritime cargo handling services, customs clearance
services, container station and depot services, maritime agency services, maritime freight
forwarding services, and storage and warehousing services;
maritime cargo handling services means the performance, organisation and supervision of:
(a)

the loading or discharging of cargo to or from a vessel,

(b)

the lashing or unlashing of cargo, and

(c)

the reception or delivery and safekeeping of cargo before shipment or after
discharge,

by stevedoring or terminal operator companies, but does not include work performed by dock
labour, when this workforce is organised independently of stevedoring or terminal operator
companies;
maritime freight forwarding services means the organisation and monitoring of shipments on
behalf of shippers, through the supply of such services as the arrangement of transport and
related services, consolidation and packing of cargo, preparation of documentation and
provision of business information;
storage and warehousing services means storage services of frozen or refrigerated goods, bulk
storage services of liquids or gases, and other storage or warehousing services.
Article 14.2
Scope
1.

This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to the
supply of international maritime transport services.20 For greater certainty, such
measure is also subject to Chapters Eight (Investment) and Nine (Cross-Border Trade
in Services), as applicable.

2.

For greater certainty, further to Articles 8.6 (National treatment), 8.7 (Mostfavoured-nation treatment), 9.3 (National treatment), and 9.5 (Most-favoured-nation
treatment), a Party shall not adopt or maintain a measure in respect of:

20

This Chapter does not apply to fishing vessels as defined under a Party’s law.

109

(a)

a vessel supplying an international maritime transport service and flying the
flag of the other Party;21 or

(b)

an international maritime transport service supplier of the other Party,

that accords treatment that is less favourable than that accorded by that Party in like
situations to its own vessels or international maritime service suppliers or to vessels
or international maritime service suppliers of a third country with regard to:
(a)

access to ports;

(b)

the use of infrastructure and services of ports such as towage and pilotage;

(c)

the use of maritime auxiliary services as well as the imposition of related fees
and charges;

(d)

access to customs facilities; or

(e)

the assignment of berths and facilities for loading and unloading.22
Article 14.3
Obligations

1.

Each Party shall permit the international maritime transport service suppliers of the
other Party to re-position owned or leased empty containers that are carried on a nonrevenue basis between the ports of that Party.

2.

A Party shall permit the international maritime transport service suppliers of the
other Party to supply feeder services between the ports of that Party.

3.

A Party shall not adopt or maintain a cargo-sharing arrangement with a third country
concerning any international maritime transport services, including dry and liquid
bulk and liner trades.

4.

A Party shall not adopt or maintain a measure that requires all or part of any
international cargo to be transported exclusively by vessels registered in that Party or
owned or controlled by nationals of that Party.

5.

A Party shall not adopt or maintain a measure that prevents international maritime
transport service suppliers of the other Party from directly contracting with other
transport service suppliers for door-to-door or multimodal transport operations.
Article 14.4
Reservations

1.

Article 14.3 does not apply to:
(a)

21

22

an existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the level
of :

For the purposes of this Chapter for the European Union, flying the flag of a Party means flying the flag
of a Member State of the European Union.
This paragraph does not apply to vessels or international maritime transport service suppliers that are
subject to the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported
and Unregulated Fishing, done in Rome on 22 November 2009.

110

(i)

the European Union, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii)

a national government, as set out by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(iii) a provincial, territorial or regional government, as set out by that Party in
its Schedule to Annex I; or
(iv) a local government.

2.

(b)

the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming measure referred to in
subparagraph (a); or

(c)

an amendment to a non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to
the extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the
measure, as it existed immediately before the amendment, with Article 14.3.

Article 14.3 does not apply to a measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect
to sectors, subsectors or activities, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II.

111

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Article 15.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
contribution link means a link for the transmission of sound or television broadcasting
signals to a programme production centre;
cost-oriented means based on cost and may involve different cost methodologies for different
facilities or services;
enterprise means an “enterprise” as defined in Article 8.1 (Definitions);
essential facilities means facilities of a public telecommunications transport network or
service that:
(a)

are exclusively or predominantly supplied by a single or a limited number of
suppliers; and

(b)

cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order to supply a
service;

interconnection means linking suppliers providing public telecommunications transport
networks or services in order to allow the users of one supplier to communicate with the users
of another supplier and to access services supplied by another supplier;
intra-corporate communications means telecommunications through which an enterprise
communicates within the enterprise or with or among its subsidiaries, branches and, subject to
a Party’s law, affiliates, but does not include commercial or non-commercial services that are
supplied to enterprises that are not related subsidiaries, branches or affiliates, or that are
offered to customers or potential customers. For the purposes of this definition, “subsidiaries”,
“branches” and, where applicable, “affiliates” are as defined by each Party;
leased circuits means telecommunications facilities between two or more designated points
that are set aside for the dedicated use of or availability to a particular customer or other users
of the customer’s choice;
major supplier means a supplier which has the ability to materially affect the terms of
participation, having regard to price and supply in the relevant market for public
telecommunications transport networks or services, as a result of:
(a)

control over essential facilities; or

(b)

use of its position in the market;

network termination point means the physical point at which a user is provided with access
to a public telecommunications transport network;
number portability means the ability of end-users of public telecommunications transport
services to retain, at the same location, the same telephone numbers without impairment of
quality, reliability or convenience when switching between suppliers of like public
112

telecommunications transport services;
public telecommunications transport network means the public telecommunications
infrastructure that permits telecommunications between and among defined network
termination points;
public telecommunications transport service means a telecommunications transport service
that a Party requires, explicitly or in effect, to be offered to the public generally that involves
the real-time transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more points
without any end-to-end change in the form or content of the customer's information. This
service may include, among other things, voice telephone services, packet-switched data
transmission services, circuit-switched data transmission services, telex services, telegraph
services, facsimile services, private leased circuit services and mobile and personal
communications services and systems;
regulatory authority means the body responsible for the regulation of telecommunications;
telecommunications services means all services consisting of the transmission and reception
of signals by any electromagnetic means but does not include the economic activity consisting
of the provision of content by means of telecommunications; and
user means an enterprise or natural person using or requesting a publicly available
telecommunications service.
Article 15.2
Scope
1.

This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party relating to
telecommunications networks or services, subject to a Party’s right to restrict the
supply of a service in accordance with its reservations as set out in its Schedule to
Annexes I and II.

2.

This Chapter does not apply to a measure of a Party affecting the transmission by any
means of telecommunications, including broadcast and cable distribution, of radio or
television programming intended for reception by the public. For greater certainty,
this Chapter applies to a contribution link.

3.

This Chapter does not:
(a)

require a Party to authorise a service supplier of the other Party to establish,
construct, acquire, lease, operate or supply telecommunications networks or
services, other than as specifically provided in this Agreement; or

(b)

require a Party, or require a Party to compel a service supplier, to establish,
construct, acquire, lease, operate or supply telecommunications networks or
services not offered to the public generally.
Article 15.3

Access to and use of public telecommunications transport networks or services
1.

A Party shall ensure that enterprises of the other Party are accorded access to and use
of public telecommunications transport networks or services on reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, including with respect to quality, technical
113

standards and specifications.23 The Parties shall apply this obligation, among other
things, as set out in paragraphs 2 through 6.
2.

Each Party shall ensure that enterprises of the other Party have access to and use of
any public telecommunications transport network or service offered within or across
its borders, including private leased circuits, and to this end shall ensure, subject to
paragraphs 5 and 6, that these enterprises are permitted to:
(a)

purchase or lease, and attach terminal or other equipment which interfaces with
the public telecommunications transport network;

(b)

connect private leased or owned circuits with public telecommunications
transport networks and services of that Party or with circuits leased or owned
by another enterprise;

(c)

use operating protocols of their choice; and

(d)

perform switching, signalling, and processing functions.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that enterprises of the other Party may use public
telecommunications transport networks and services for the movement of
information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate
communications of these enterprises, and for access to information contained in data
bases or otherwise stored in machine-readable form in the territory of either Party.

4.

Further to Article 28.3 (General exceptions), and notwithstanding paragraph 3, a
Party shall take appropriate measures to protect:
(a)

the security and confidentiality of public telecommunications transport
services; and

(b)

the privacy of users of public telecommunications transport services,

subject to the requirement that these measures are not applied in a manner that would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised
restriction on trade.
5.

6.

Each Party shall ensure that no condition is imposed on access to and use of public
telecommunications transport networks or services other than as necessary to:
(a)

safeguard the public service responsibilities of suppliers of public
telecommunications transport networks or services, in particular their ability to
make their networks or services available to the public generally;

(b)

protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications transport networks
or services; or

(c)

ensure that service suppliers of the other Party do not supply services limited
by the Party’s reservations as set out in its Schedule to Annexes I or II.

Provided that they satisfy the criteria in paragraph 5, conditions for access to and use
of public telecommunications transport networks or services may include:
(a)

23

restrictions on resale or shared use of these services;

non-discriminatory means treatment no less favourable than that accorded to any other enterprise
when using like public telecommunications transport networks or services in like situations.

114

(b)

a requirement to use specified technical interfaces, including interface
protocols, for connection with such networks or services;

(c)

requirements, where necessary, for the inter-operability of these services;

(d)

type approval of terminal or other equipment that interfaces with the network
and technical requirements relating to the attachment of that equipment to the
networks;

(e)

restrictions on connection of private leased or owned circuits with these
networks or services or with circuits leased or owned by another enterprise;
and

(f)

notification, registration and licensing.
Article 15.4
Competitive safeguards on major suppliers

1.

Each Party shall maintain appropriate measures to prevent suppliers that, alone or
together, are a major supplier from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive
practices.

2.

The anti-competitive practices referred to in paragraph 1 include:
(a)

engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation;

(b)

using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results; and

(c)

not making available to other service suppliers, on a timely basis, technical
information about essential facilities and commercially relevant information
which are necessary for them to supply services.
Article 15.5
Access to essential facilities

1.

Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory makes available its
essential facilities, which may include, among other things, network elements,
operational support systems or support structures, to suppliers of telecommunications
services of the other Party on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and
conditions and cost-oriented rates.

2.

Each Party may determine, in accordance with its laws, those essential facilities
required to be made available in its territory.
Article 15.6
Interconnection

1.

Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier in its territory provides interconnection:
(a)

at any technically feasible point in the network;

(b)

under non-discriminatory terms, conditions, including technical standards and
specifications, and rates;

115

(c)

of a quality no less favourable than that provided for its own like services or
for like services of non-affiliated service suppliers or of its subsidiaries or other
affiliates;

(e)

in a timely fashion, on terms, conditions, (including technical standards and
specifications) and cost-oriented rates that are transparent, reasonable, having
regard to economic feasibility, and sufficiently unbundled so that a supplier
need not pay for network components or facilities that it does not require for
the services to be supplied; and

(f)

upon request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered to
the majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of
necessary additional facilities.

2.

A supplier that is authorised to supply telecommunications services has the right to
negotiate a new interconnection agreement with other suppliers of public
telecommunications transport networks and services. Each Party shall ensure that
major suppliers are required to establish a reference interconnection offer or
negotiate interconnection agreements with other suppliers of telecommunications
networks and services.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications transport
services that acquire information from another such supplier during the process of
negotiating interconnection arrangements use that information solely for the purpose
for which it was supplied and respect at all times the confidentiality of information
transmitted or stored.

4.

Each Party shall ensure that the procedures applicable for interconnection to a major
supplier shall be made publicly available.

5.

Each Party shall ensure that a major supplier makes publicly available either its
interconnection agreements or reference interconnection offer if it is appropriate.
Article 15.7
Authorisation to supply telecommunications services

Each Party should ensure that the authorisation to supply telecommunications services,
wherever possible, is based upon a simple notification procedure.
Article 15.8
Universal service
1.

Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligations it wishes
to maintain.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that any measure on universal service that it adopts or
maintains is administered in a transparent, objective, non-discriminatory and
competitively neutral manner. Each Party shall also ensure that any universal service
obligation it imposes is not more burdensome than necessary for the kind of
universal service that the Party has defined.

116

3.

All suppliers should be eligible to ensure universal service. If a supplier is to be
designated as the supplier of a universal service, the Parties shall ensure that the
selection is made through an efficient, transparent and non-discriminatory
mechanism.
Article 15.9
Scarce resources

1.

Each Party shall administer its procedures for the allocation and use of scarce
resources, including frequencies, numbers and rights of way, in an objective, timely,
transparent and non-discriminatory manner.

2.

Notwithstanding Articles 8.4 (Market access) and 9.6 (Market access), a Party may
adopt or maintain a measure that allocates and assigns spectrum and that manages
frequencies. Accordingly, each Party retains the right to establish and apply its
spectrum and frequency management policies that may limit the number of suppliers
of public telecommunications transport services. Each Party also retains the right to
allocate frequency bands taking into account present and future needs.

3.

Each Party shall make the current state of allocated frequency bands publicly
available but shall not be required to provide detailed identification of frequencies
allocated for specific government use.
Article 15.10
Number portability

Each Party shall ensure that suppliers of public telecommunications transport services in its
territory provide number portability on reasonable terms and conditions.
Article 15.11
Regulatory authority
1.

Each Party shall ensure that its regulatory authority is legally distinct and
functionally independent from any supplier of telecommunications transport
networks, services or equipment, including if a Party retains ownership or control of
a supplier of telecommunications transport networks or services.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that its regulatory authority’s decisions and procedures are
impartial with respect to all market participants and are administered in a transparent
and timely manner.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that its regulatory authority is sufficiently empowered to
regulate the sector, including by ensuring that it has the power to:
(a)

require suppliers of telecommunications transport networks or services to
submit any information the regulatory authority considers necessary for the
administration of its responsibilities; and

(b)

enforce its decisions relating to the obligations set out in Articles 15.3 through
15.6 through appropriate sanctions that may include financial penalties,
corrective orders or the suspension or revocation of licences.
117

Article 15.12
Resolution of telecommunication disputes
Recourse to regulatory authorities
1.

Further to Articles 27.3 (Administrative proceedings) and 27.4 (Review and appeal),
each Party shall ensure that:
(a)

enterprises have timely recourse to its regulatory authority to resolve disputes
with suppliers of public telecommunications transport networks or services
regarding the matters covered in Articles 15.3 through 15.6 and that, under the
law of the Party, are within the regulatory authority’s jurisdiction. As
appropriate, the regulatory authority shall issue a binding decision to resolve
the dispute within a reasonable period of time.

(b)

suppliers of telecommunications networks or services of the other Party
requesting access to essential facilities or interconnection with a major supplier
in the Party’s territory have, within a reasonable and publicly specified period
of time, recourse to a regulatory authority to resolve disputes regarding the
appropriate terms, conditions and rates for interconnection or access with that
major supplier.

Appeal and review of regulatory authority determinations or decisions
2.

Each Party shall ensure that an enterprise whose interests are adversely affected by a
determination or decision of a regulatory authority may obtain review of the
determination or decision by an impartial and independent judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative authority, as provided in the law of the Party. The judicial, quasijudicial or administrative authority shall provide the enterprise with written reasons
supporting its determination or decision. Each Party shall ensure that these
determinations or decisions, subject to appeal or further review, are implemented by
the regulatory authority.

3.

An application for judicial review does not constitute grounds for non-compliance
with the determination or decision of the regulatory authority unless the relevant
judicial authority stays this determination or decision.
Article 15.13
Transparency

1.

Further to Articles 27.1 (Publication) and 27.2 (Provision of information), and in
addition to the other provisions in this Chapter relating to the publication of
information, each Party shall make publicly available:
(a)

the responsibilities of a regulatory authority in an easily accessible and clear
form, in particular where those responsibilities are given to more than one
body;

(b)

its measures relating to public telecommunications transport networks or
services, including:
(i)

regulations of its regulatory authority, together with the basis for these
regulations;

118

(ii)

tariffs and other terms and conditions of services;

(iii) specifications of technical interfaces;
(iv) conditions for attaching terminal or other equipment to the public
telecommunications transport networks;
(v)
(c)

notification, permit, registration, or licensing requirements, if any; and

information on bodies responsible for preparing, amending and adopting
standards-related measures.
Article 15.14
Forbearance

The Parties recognise the importance of a competitive market to achieve legitimate public
policy objectives for telecommunications services. To this end, and to the extent provided in
its law, each Party may refrain from applying a regulation to a telecommunications service
when, following analysis of the market, it is determined that effective competition is
achieved.
Article 15.15
Relation to other chapters
If there is any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, this Chapter prevails
to the extent of the inconsistency.

119

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
Article 16.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
delivery means a computer program, text, video, image, sound recording or other delivery
that is digitally encoded; and
electronic commerce means commerce conducted through telecommunications, alone or in
conjunction with other information and communication technologies.
Article 16.2
Objective and scope
1.

The Parties recognise that electronic commerce increases economic growth and trade
opportunities in many sectors and confirm the applicability of the WTO rules to
electronic commerce. They agree to promote the development of electronic
commerce between them, in particular by cooperating on the issues raised by
electronic commerce under the provisions of this Chapter.

2.

This Chapter does not impose an obligation on a Party to allow a delivery transmitted
by electronic means except in accordance with the Party’s obligations under another
provision of this Agreement.
Article 16.3
Customs duties on electronic deliveries

1.

A Party shall not impose a customs duty, fee, or charge on a delivery transmitted by
electronic means.

2.

For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not prevent a Party from imposing an internal
tax or other internal charge on a delivery transmitted by electronic means, provided
that the tax or charge is imposed in a manner consistent with this Agreement.
Article 16.4
Trust and confidence in electronic commerce

Each Party should adopt or maintain laws, regulations or administrative measures for the
protection of personal information of users engaged in electronic commerce and, when doing
so, shall take into due consideration international standards of data protection of relevant
international organisations of which both Parties are a member.
Article 16.5
General provisions
120

Considering the potential of electronic commerce as a social and economic development tool,
the Parties recognise the importance of:
(a)

clarity, transparency and predictability in their domestic regulatory frameworks in
facilitating, to the maximum extent possible, the development of electronic
commerce;

(b)

interoperability, innovation and competition in facilitating electronic commerce; and

(c)

facilitating the use of electronic commerce by small and medium sized enterprises.
Article 16.6
Dialogue on electronic commerce

1.

Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, the Parties agree to maintain a
dialogue on issues raised by electronic commerce, which will address, among other
things:
(a)

the recognition of certificates of electronic signatures issued to the public and
the facilitation of cross-border certification services;

(b)

the liability of intermediary service suppliers with respect to the transmission,
or the storage of information;

(c)

the treatment of unsolicited electronic commercial communications; and

(d)

the protection of personal information and the protection of consumers and
businesses from fraudulent and deceptive commercial practices in the sphere of
electronic commerce.

2.

The dialogue in paragraph 1 may take the form of exchange of information on the
Parties’ respective laws, regulations, and other measures on these issues, as well as
sharing experiences on the implementation of such laws, regulations and other
measures.

3.

Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, the Parties affirm the
importance of actively participating in multilateral fora to promote the development
of electronic commerce.
Article 16.7
Relation to other chapters

In the event of an inconsistency between this Chapter and another chapter of this Agreement,
the other chapter prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.

121

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
COMPETITION POLICY
Article 17.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
anti-competitive business conduct means anti-competitive agreements, concerted practices
or arrangements by competitors, anti-competitive practices by an enterprise that is dominant
in a market, and mergers with substantial anti-competitive effects; and,
service of general economic interest means, for the European Union, a service that cannot
be provided satisfactorily and under conditions, such as price, objective quality
characteristics, continuity, and access to the service, consistent with the public interest, by an
undertaking operating under normal market conditions. The operation of a service of general
economic interest must be entrusted to one or more undertakings by the state by way of a
public service assignment that defines the obligations of the undertakings in question and of
the state.
Article 17.2
Competition policy
1.

The Parties recognise the importance of free and undistorted competition in their
trade relations. The Parties acknowledge that anti-competitive business conduct has
the potential to distort the proper functioning of markets and undermine the benefits
of trade liberalisation.

2.

The Parties shall take appropriate measures to proscribe anti-competitive business
conduct, recognising that such measures will enhance the fulfilment of the objectives
of this Agreement.

3.

The Parties shall cooperate on matters relating to the proscription of anti-competitive
business conduct in the free trade area in accordance with the Agreement between
the European Communities and the Government of Canada Regarding the
Application of their Competition Laws, done at Bonn on 17 June 1999.

4.

The measures referred to in paragraph 2 shall be consistent with the principles of
transparency, non-discrimination, and procedural fairness. Exclusions from the
application of competition law shall be transparent. A Party shall make available to
the other Party public information concerning such exclusions provided under its
competition law.
Article 17.3
Application of competition policy to enterprises

122

1.

A Party shall ensure that the measures referred to in Article 17.2.2 apply to the
Parties to the extent required by its law.

2.

For greater certainty:
(a)

in Canada, the Competition Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34 is binding on and applies
to an agent of Her Majesty in right of Canada, or of a province, that is a
corporation, in respect of commercial activities engaged in by the corporation
in competition, whether actual or potential, with other persons to the extent that
it would apply if the agent were not an agent of Her Majesty. Such an agent
may include state enterprises, monopolies, and enterprises granted special or
exclusive rights or privileges; and

(b)

in the European Union, state enterprises, monopolies, and enterprises granted
special rights or privileges are subject to the European Union’s rules on
competition. However, enterprises entrusted with the operation of services of
general economic interest or having the character of a revenue-producing
monopoly are subject to these rules, in so far as the application of these rules
does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular tasks
assigned to them.
Article 17.4
Dispute settlement

Nothing in this Chapter shall be subject to any form of dispute settlement pursuant to this
Agreement.

123

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
STATE ENTERPRISES, MONOPOLIES, AND
ENTERPRISES GRANTED SPECIAL RIGHTS OR PRIVILEGES
Article 18.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
covered entity means:
(a)

a monopoly;

(b)

a supplier of a good or service, if it is one of a small number of goods or services
suppliers authorised or established by a Party, formally or in effect, and the Party
substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory;

(c)

any entity to which a Party has granted, formally or in effect, special rights or
privileges to supply a good or service, substantially affecting the ability of any other
enterprise to supply the same good or service in the same geographical area under
substantially equivalent conditions, and allowing the entity to escape, in whole or in
part, competitive pressures or market constraints;24 or

(d)

a state enterprise;

designate means to establish or authorise a monopoly, or to expand the scope of a monopoly
to cover an additional good or service;
in accordance with commercial considerations means consistent with customary business
practices of a privately held enterprise in the relevant business or industry; and
non-discriminatory treatment means the better of national treatment and most-favourednation treatment as set out in this Agreement.
Article 18.2
Scope
1.

The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Articles XVII:1 through
XVII:3 of the GATT 1994, the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XVII
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, and Articles VIII:1 and VIII:2
of GATS, all of which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.

2.

This Chapter does not apply to the procurement by a Party of a good or service
purchased for governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial resale or
with a view to use in the supply of a good or service for commercial sale, whether or

24

For greater certainty, the granting of a licence to a limited number of enterprises in allocating a scarce
resource through objective, proportional and non-discriminatory criteria is not in and of itself a special
right.

124

not that procurement is a “covered procurement” within the meaning of Article 19.2
(Scope and coverage).
3.

Articles 18.4 and 18.5 do not apply to the sectors set out in Article 8.2 (Scope) and
Article 9.2 (Scope).

4

Articles 18.4 and 18.5 do not apply to a measure of a covered entity if a reservation
of a Party, taken against a national treatment or most-favoured nation treatment
obligation, as set out in that Party’s Schedule to Annex I, II, or III, would be
applicable if the same measure had been adopted or maintained by that Party.
Article 18.3
State enterprises, monopolies and enterprises granted special rights or privileges

1.

Without prejudice to the Parties’ rights and obligations under this Agreement,
nothing in this Chapter prevents a Party from designating or maintaining a state
enterprise or a monopoly or from granting an enterprise special rights or privileges.

2.

A Party shall not require or encourage a covered entity to act in a manner
inconsistent with this Agreement.
Article 18.4
Non-discriminatory treatment

1.

Each Party shall ensure that in its territory a covered entity accords nondiscriminatory treatment to a covered investment, to a good of the other Party, or to a
service supplier of the other Party in the purchase or sale of a good or service.

2.

If a covered entity described in paragraphs (b) through (d) of the definition of
“covered entity” in Article 18.1 acts in accordance with Article 18.5.1, the Party in
whose territory the covered entity is located shall be deemed to be in compliance
with the obligations set out in paragraph 1 in respect of that covered entity.
Article 18.5
Commercial considerations

1.

Each Party shall ensure that a covered entity in its territory acts in accordance with
commercial considerations in the purchase or sale of goods, including with regard to
price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation, and other terms and
conditions of purchase or sale, as well as in the purchase or supply of services,
including when such goods or services are supplied to or by an investment of an
investor of the other Party.

2.

Provided that a covered entity’s conduct is consistent with Article 18.4 and Chapter
Seventeen (Competition Policy), the obligation contained in paragraph 1 does not
apply:
(a)

in the case of a monopoly, to the fulfilment of the purpose for which the
monopoly has been created or for which special rights or privileges have been
granted, such as a public service obligation or regional development; or,
125

(b)

in the case of a state enterprise, to the fulfilment of its public mandate.

126

CHAPTER NINETEEN
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
Article 19.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
commercial goods or services means goods or services of a type generally sold or offered for
sale in the commercial marketplace to, and customarily purchased by, non-governmental
buyers for non-governmental purposes;
construction service means a service that has as its objective the realisation by whatever
means of civil or building works, based on Division 51 of the United Nations Provisional
Central Product Classification (CPC);
electronic auction means an iterative process that involves the use of electronic means for the
presentation by suppliers of either new prices, or new values for quantifiable non-price
elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, or both, resulting in a ranking or
re-ranking of tenders;
in writing or written means any worded or numbered expression that can be read, reproduced
and later communicated. It may include electronically transmitted and stored information;
limited tendering means a procurement method whereby the procuring entity contacts a
supplier or suppliers of its choice;
measure means any law, regulation, procedure, administrative guidance or practice, or any
action of a procuring entity relating to a covered procurement;
multi-use list means a list of suppliers that a procuring entity has determined satisfy the
conditions for participation in that list, and that the procuring entity intends to use more than
once;
notice of intended procurement means a notice published by a procuring entity inviting
interested suppliers to submit a request for participation, a tender, or both;
offset means any condition or undertaking that encourages local development or improves a
Party’s balance-of-payments accounts, such as the use of domestic content, the licensing of
technology, investment, counter-trade and similar action or requirement;
open tendering means a procurement method whereby all interested suppliers may submit a
tender;
person means “person” as defined in Article 1.1 (Definitions of general application);
procuring entity means an entity covered under Annexes 19-1, 19-2 or 19-3 of a Party’s
Market Access Schedule for this Chapter;
qualified supplier means a supplier that a procuring entity recognises as having satisfied the
conditions for participation;
selective tendering means a procurement method whereby only qualified suppliers are
invited by the procuring entity to submit a tender;

127

services includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;
standard means a document approved by a recognised body that provides for common and
repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or services, or related processes and
production methods, with which compliance is not mandatory. It may also include or deal
exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements as they
apply to a good, service, process or production method;
supplier means a person or group of persons that provides or could provide goods or services;
and
technical specification means a tendering requirement that:
(a)

lays down the characteristics of a good or a service to be procured, including
quality, performance, safety and dimensions, or the processes and methods for
their production or provision; or

(b)

addresses terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labelling requirements,
as they apply to a good or a service.
Article 19.2
Scope and coverage

Application of this Chapter
1.

This Chapter applies to any measure relating to a covered procurement, whether or
not it is conducted exclusively or partially by electronic means.

2.

For the purposes of this Chapter, covered procurement means procurement for
governmental purposes:
(a)

3.

of a good, a service, or any combination thereof:
(i)

as specified in each Party’s Annexes to its Market Access Schedule for
this Chapter; and

(ii)

not procured with a view to commercial sale or resale, or for use in the
production or supply of a good or a service for commercial sale or resale;

(b)

by any contractual means, including: purchase; lease; and rental or hire
purchase, with or without an option to buy;

(c)

for which the value, as estimated in accordance with paragraphs 6 through 8,
equals or exceeds the relevant threshold specified in a Party’s Annexes to its
Market Access Schedule for this Chapter, at the time of publication of a notice
in accordance with Article 19.6;

(d)

by a procuring entity; and

(e)

that is not otherwise excluded from coverage in paragraph 3 or a Party’s
Annexes to its Market Access Schedule for this Chapter.

Except as otherwise provided in a Party’s Annexes to its Market Access Schedule for
this Chapter, this Chapter does not apply to:
(a)

the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other immovable
property or the rights thereon;
128

(b)

non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party provides,
including cooperative agreements, grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees
and fiscal incentives;

(c)

the procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or depository services,
liquidation and management services for regulated financial institutions or
services related to the sale, redemption and distribution of public debt,
including loans and government bonds, notes and other securities;

(d)

public employment contracts;

(e)

procurement conducted:
(i)

for the specific purpose of providing international assistance, including
development aid;

(ii)

under the particular procedure or condition of an international agreement
relating to the stationing of troops or relating to the joint implementation
by the signatory countries of a project; or

(iii) under the particular procedure or condition of an international
organisation, or funded by international grants, loans or other assistance
if the applicable procedure or condition would be inconsistent with this
Chapter.
4.

5.

A procurement subject to this Chapter shall be all procurement covered by the
Market Access Schedules of Canada and the European Union, in which each Party’s
commitments are set out as follows:
(a)

in Annex 19-1, the central government entities whose procurement is covered
by this Chapter;

(b)

in Annex 19-2, the sub-central government entities whose procurement is
covered by this Chapter;

(c)

in Annex 19-3, all other entities whose procurement is covered by this Chapter;

(d)

in Annex 19-4, the goods covered by this Chapter;

(e)

in Annex 19-5, the services, other than construction services, covered by this
Chapter;

(f)

in Annex 19-6, the construction services covered by this Chapter;

(g)

in Annex 19-7, any General Notes; and

(h)

in Annex 19-8, the means of publication used for this Chapter.

If a procuring entity, in the context of covered procurement, requires a person not
covered under a Party’s Annexes to its Market Access Schedule for this Chapter to
procure in accordance with particular requirements, Article 19.4 shall apply
mutatis mutandis to such requirements.

Valuation
6.

In estimating the value of a procurement for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is
a covered procurement, a procuring entity shall:

129

7.

8.

(a)

neither divide a procurement into separate procurements nor select or use a
particular valuation method for estimating the value of a procurement with the
intention of totally or partially excluding it from the application of this
Chapter; and

(b)

include the estimated maximum total value of the procurement over its entire
duration, whether awarded to one or more suppliers, taking into account all
forms of remuneration, including:
(i)

premiums, fees, commissions and interest; and

(ii)

if the procurement provides for the possibility of options, the total value
of such options.

If an individual requirement for a procurement results in the award of more than one
contract, or in the award of contracts in separate parts (“recurring contracts”) the
calculation of the estimated maximum total value shall be based on:
(a)

the value of recurring contracts of the same type of good or service awarded
during the preceding 12 months or the procuring entity’s preceding fiscal year,
adjusted, if possible, to take into account anticipated changes in the quantity or
value of the good or service being procured over the following 12 months; or

(b)

the estimated value of recurring contracts of the same type of good or service
to be awarded during the 12 months following the initial contract award or the
procuring entity’s fiscal year.

In the case of procurement by lease, rental or hire purchase of a good or a service, or
procurement for which a total price is not specified, the basis for valuation shall be:
(a)

in the case of a fixed-term contract:
(i)

if the term of the contract is 12 months or less, the total estimated
maximum value for its duration; or

(ii)

if the term of the contract exceeds 12 months, the total estimated
maximum value, including any estimated residual value;

(b)

if the contract is for an indefinite period, the estimated monthly instalment
multiplied by 48; and

(c)

if it is not certain whether the contract is to be a fixed-term contract, subparagraph (b) shall be used.
Article 19.3
Security and general exceptions

1.

25

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any action
or from not disclosing any information that it considers necessary for the protection
of its essential security interests relating to the procurement:
(a)

of arms, ammunition25 or war material;

(b)

or to procurement indispensable for national security; or

The expression “ammunition” in this Article is considered equivalent to the expression “munitions”.

130

(c)
2.

for national defence purposes.

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner that would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Parties where
the same conditions prevail or a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing
in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from imposing or enforcing
measures:
(a)

necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;

(b)

necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(c)

necessary to protect intellectual property; or

(d)

relating to goods or services of persons with disabilities, of philanthropic
institutions or of prison labour.
Article 19.4
General principles

Non-Discrimination
1.

2.

With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, each Party, including
its procuring entities, shall accord immediately and unconditionally to the goods and
services of the other Party and to the suppliers of the other Party offering such goods
or services, treatment no less favourable than the treatment the Party, including its
procuring entities, accords to its own goods, services and suppliers. For greater
certainty, such treatment includes:
(a)

within Canada, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by a province
or territory, including its procuring entities, to goods and services of, and to
suppliers located in, that province or territory; and

(b)

within the European Union, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by
a Member State or a sub-central region of a Member State, including its
procuring entities, to goods and services of, and suppliers located in, that
Member State or sub-central region, as the case may be.

With respect to any measure regarding covered procurement, a Party, including its
procuring entities, shall not:
(a)

treat a locally established supplier less favourably than another locally
established supplier on the basis of the degree of foreign affiliation or
ownership; or

(b)

discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the goods or
services offered by that supplier for a particular procurement are goods or
services of the other Party.

Use of Electronic Means
3.

When conducting covered procurement by electronic means, a procuring entity shall:
(a)

ensure that the procurement is conducted using information technology
systems and software, including those related to authentication and encryption

131

of information, that are generally available and interoperable with other
generally available information technology systems and software; and
(b)

maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of requests for participation and
tenders, including establishment of the time of receipt and the prevention of
inappropriate access.

Conduct of Procurement
4.

A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and impartial
manner that:
(a)

is consistent with this Chapter, using methods such as open tendering, selective
tendering and limited tendering;

(b)

avoids conflicts of interest; and

(c)

prevents corrupt practices.

Rules of Origin
5.

For the purposes of covered procurement, a Party shall not apply rules of origin to
goods or services imported from or supplied from the other Party that are different
from the rules of origin the Party applies at the same time in the normal course of
trade to imports or supplies of the same goods or services from the same Party.

Offsets
6.

With regard to covered procurement, a Party, including its procuring entities, shall
not seek, take account of, impose or enforce any offset.

Measures Not Specific to Procurement
7.

Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to: customs duties and charges of any kind
imposed on, or in connection with, importation; the method of levying such duties
and charges; other import regulations or formalities and measures affecting trade in
services other than measures governing covered procurement.
Article 19.5
Information on the procurement system

1.

2.

Each Party shall:
(a)

promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision, administrative ruling of
general application, standard contract clause mandated by law or regulation
and incorporated by reference in notices or tender documentation and
procedure regarding covered procurement, and any modifications thereof, in an
officially designated electronic or paper medium that is widely disseminated
and remains readily accessible to the public; and

(b)

provide an explanation thereof to the other Party, on request.

Each Party shall list, in Annex 19-8 of its Market Access Schedule:
(a)

the electronic or paper media in which the Party publishes the information
described in paragraph 1;

132

3.

(b)

the electronic or paper media in which the Party publishes the notices required
by Articles 19.6, 19.8.7 and 19.15.2; and

(c)

the website address or addresses where the Party publishes:
(i)

its procurement statistics pursuant to Article 19.15.5; or

(ii)

its notices concerning awarded contracts pursuant to Article 19.15.6.

Each Party shall promptly notify the Committee on Government Procurement of any
modification to the Party’s information listed in Annex 19-8.
Article 19.6
Notices

Notice of Intended Procurement
1.

For each covered procurement a procuring entity shall publish a notice of intended
procurement, except in the circumstances described in Article 19.12.
All the notices of intended procurement shall be directly accessible by electronic
means free of charge through a single point of access subject to paragraph 2. The
notices may also be published in an appropriate paper medium that is widely
disseminated and those notices shall remain readily accessible to the public, at least
until expiration of the time-period indicated in the notice.
The appropriate paper and electronic medium is listed by each Party in Annex 19-8.

2.

A Party may apply a transitional period of up to 5 years from the date of entry into
force of this Agreement to entities covered by Annexes 19-2 and 19-3 that are not
ready to participate in a single point of access referred to in paragraph 1. Those
entities shall, during such transitional period, provide their notices of intended
procurement, if accessible by electronic means, through links in a gateway electronic
site that is accessible free of charge and listed in Annex 19-8.

3.

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each notice of intended procurement
shall include:
(a)

the name and address of the procuring entity and other information necessary
to contact the procuring entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the
procurement, and their cost and terms of payment, if any;

(b)

a description of the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the
goods or services to be procured or, if the quantity is not known, the estimated
quantity;

(c)

for recurring contracts, an estimate, if possible, of the timing of subsequent
notices of intended procurement;

(d)

a description of any options;

(e)

the time-frame for delivery of goods or services or the duration of the contract;

(f)

the procurement method that will be used and whether it will involve
negotiation or electronic auction;

133

(g)

if applicable, the address and any final date for the submission of requests for
participation in the procurement;

(h)

the address and the final date for the submission of tenders;

(i)

the language or languages in which tenders or requests for participation may be
submitted, if they may be submitted in a language other than an official
language of the Party of the procuring entity;

(j)

a list and brief description of any conditions for participation of suppliers,
including any requirements for specific documents or certifications to be
provided by suppliers in connection therewith, unless such requirements are
included in tender documentation that is made available to all interested
suppliers at the same time as the notice of intended procurement;

(k)

if, pursuant to Article 19.8, a procuring entity intends to select a limited
number of qualified suppliers to be invited to tender, the criteria that will be
used to select them and, if applicable, any limitation on the number of suppliers
that will be permitted to tender; and

(l)

an indication that the procurement is covered by this Chapter.

Summary Notice
4.

For each case of intended procurement, a procuring entity shall publish a summary
notice that is readily accessible, at the same time as the publication of the notice of
intended procurement, in English or French. The summary notice shall contain at
least the following information:
(a)

the subject-matter of the procurement;

(b)

the final date for the submission of tenders or, if applicable, any final date for
the submission of requests for participation in the procurement or for inclusion
on a multi-use list; and

(c)

the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be
requested.

Notice of Planned Procurement
5.

Procuring entities are encouraged to publish in the appropriate electronic, and, if
available, paper medium listed in Annex 19-8 as early as possible in each fiscal year
a notice regarding their future procurement plans (“notice of planned procurement”).
The notice of planned procurement shall also be published in the single point of
access site listed in Annex 19-8, subject to paragraph 2. The notice of planned
procurement should include the subject-matter of the procurement and the planned
date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement.

6.

A procuring entity covered under Annexes 19-2 or 19-3 may use a notice of planned
procurement as a notice of intended procurement provided that the notice of planned
procurement includes as much of the information referred to in paragraph 3 as is
available to the entity and a statement that interested suppliers should express their
interest in the procurement to the procuring entity.

134

Article 19.7
Conditions for participation
1.

A procuring entity shall limit any conditions for participation in a procurement to
those that are essential to ensure that a supplier has the legal and financial capacities
and the commercial and technical abilities to undertake the relevant procurement.

2.

In establishing the conditions for participation, a procuring entity:

3.

4.

(a)

shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate in a
procurement, the supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts
by a procuring entity of a Party;

(b)

may require relevant prior experience if essential to meet the requirements of
the procurement; and

(c)

shall not require prior experience in the territory of the Party to be a condition
of the procurement.

In assessing whether a supplier satisfies the conditions for participation, a procuring
entity:
(a)

shall evaluate the financial capacity and the commercial and technical abilities
of a supplier on the basis of that supplier’s business activities both inside and
outside the territory of the Party of the procuring entity; and

(b)

shall base its evaluation on the conditions that the procuring entity has
specified in advance in notices or tender documentation.

If there is supporting evidence, a Party, including its procuring entities, may exclude
a supplier on grounds such as:
(a)

bankruptcy;

(b)

false declarations;

(c)

significant or persistent deficiencies in performance of any substantive
requirement or obligation under a prior contract or contracts;

(d)

final judgments in respect of serious crimes or other serious offences;

(e)

professional misconduct or acts or omissions that adversely reflect on the
commercial integrity of the supplier; or

(f)

failure to pay taxes.
Article 19.8
Qualification of suppliers

Registration Systems and Qualification Procedures
1.

A Party, including its procuring entities, may maintain a supplier registration system
under which interested suppliers are required to register and provide certain
information.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that:

135

3.

(a)

its procuring entities make efforts to minimise differences in their qualification
procedures; and

(b)

if its procuring entities maintain registration systems, the entities make efforts
to minimise differences in their registration systems.

A Party, including its procuring entities, shall not adopt or apply a registration
system or qualification procedure with the purpose or the effect of creating
unnecessary obstacles to the participation of suppliers of the other Party in its
procurement.

Selective Tendering
4.

If a procuring entity intends to use selective tendering, the entity shall:
(a)

include in the notice of intended procurement at least the information specified
in Article 19.6.3(a), (b), (f), (g), (j), (k) and (l) and invite suppliers to submit a
request for participation; and

(b)

provide, by the commencement of the time-period for tendering, at least the
information in Article 19.6.3(c), (d), (e), (h) and (i) to the qualified suppliers
that it notifies as specified in Article 19.10.3(b).

5.

A procuring entity shall allow all qualified suppliers to participate in a particular
procurement, unless the procuring entity states in the notice of intended procurement
any limitation on the number of suppliers that will be permitted to tender and the
criteria for selecting the limited number of suppliers.

6.

If the tender documentation is not made publicly available from the date of
publication of the notice referred to in paragraph 4, a procuring entity shall ensure
that those documents are made available at the same time to all the qualified
suppliers selected in accordance with paragraph 5.

Multi-Use Lists
7.

A procuring entity may maintain a multi-use list of suppliers, provided that a notice
inviting interested suppliers to apply for inclusion on the list is:
(a)

published annually; and

(b)

if published by electronic means, made available continuously,

in the appropriate medium listed in Annex 19-8.
8.

The notice provided for in paragraph 7 shall include:
(a)

a description of the goods or services, or categories thereof, for which the list
may be used;

(b)

the conditions for participation to be satisfied by suppliers for inclusion on the
list and the methods that the procuring entity will use to verify that a supplier
satisfies the conditions;

(c)

the name and address of the procuring entity and other information necessary
to contact the entity and obtain all relevant documents relating to the list;

136

9.

(d)

the period of validity of the list and the means for its renewal or termination, or
if the period of validity is not provided, an indication of the method by which
notice will be given of the termination of use of the list; and

(e)

an indication that the list may be used for procurement covered by this Chapter.

Notwithstanding paragraph 7, if a multi-use list will be valid for three years or less, a
procuring entity may publish the notice referred to in paragraph 7 only once, at the
beginning of the period of validity of the list, provided that the notice:
(a)

states the period of validity and that further notices will not be published; and

(b)

is published by electronic means and is made available continuously during the
period of its validity.

10.

A procuring entity shall allow suppliers to apply at any time for inclusion on a multiuse list and shall include on the list all qualified suppliers within a reasonably short
time.

11.

If a supplier that is not included on a multi-use list submits a request for participation
in a procurement based on a multi-use list and all required documents, within the
time-period provided for in Article 19.10.2, a procuring entity shall examine the
request. The procuring entity shall not exclude the supplier from consideration in
respect of the procurement on the grounds that the entity has insufficient time to
examine the request, unless, in exceptional cases, due to the complexity of the
procurement, the entity is not able to complete the examination of the request within
the time-period allowed for the submission of tenders.

Procuring Entities of Annex 19-2 and Annex 19-3
12.

13.

A procuring entity covered under Annexes 19-2 or 19-3 may use a notice inviting
suppliers to apply for inclusion on a multi-use list as a notice of intended
procurement, provided that:
(a)

the notice is published in accordance with paragraph 7 and includes the
information required under paragraph 8, as much of the information required
under Article 19.6.3 as is available and a statement that it constitutes a notice
of intended procurement or that only the suppliers on the multi-use list will
receive further notices of procurement covered by the multi-use list; and

(b)

the entity promptly provides to suppliers that have expressed an interest in a
given procurement to the entity, sufficient information to permit them to assess
their interest in the procurement, including all remaining information required
in Article 19.6.3, to the extent such information is available.

A procuring entity covered under Annexes 19-2 or 19-3 may allow a supplier that
has applied for inclusion on a multi-use list in accordance with paragraph 10 to
tender in a given procurement, if there is sufficient time for the procuring entity to
examine whether the supplier satisfies the conditions for participation.

Information on Procuring Entity Decisions
14.

A procuring entity shall promptly inform any supplier that submits a request for
participation in a procurement or application for inclusion on a multi-use list of the
procuring entity’s decision with respect to the request or application.

137

15.

If a procuring entity rejects a supplier’s request for participation in a procurement or
application for inclusion on a multi-use list, ceases to recognise a supplier as
qualified, or removes a supplier from a multi-use list, the entity shall promptly
inform the supplier and, on request of the supplier, promptly provide the supplier
with a written explanation of the reasons for its decision.
Article 19.9
Technical specifications and tender documentation

Technical Specifications
1.

A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification or
prescribe any conformity assessment procedure with the purpose or the effect of
creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade.

2.

In prescribing the technical specifications for the goods or services being procured, a
procuring entity shall, if appropriate:
(a)

set out the technical specification in terms of performance and functional
requirements, rather than design or descriptive characteristics; and

(b)

base the technical specification on international standards, if they exist;
otherwise, on national technical regulations, recognised national standards or
building codes.

3.

If design or descriptive characteristics are used in the technical specifications, a
procuring entity should indicate, if appropriate, that it will consider tenders of
equivalent goods or services that demonstrably fulfil the requirements of the
procurement by including words such as “or equivalent” in the tender
documentation.

4.

A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or refer to
a particular trademark or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, specific origin,
producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible way
of describing the procurement requirements and provided that, in such cases, the
entity includes words such as “or equivalent” in the tender documentation.

5.

A procuring entity shall not seek or accept, in a manner that would have the effect of
precluding competition, advice that may be used in the preparation or adoption of
any technical specification for a specific procurement from a person that may have a
commercial interest in the procurement.

6.

For greater certainty, a Party, including its procuring entities, may prepare, adopt or
apply technical specifications to promote the conservation of natural resources or
protect the environment, provided that it does so in accordance with this Article.

Tender Documentation
7.

A procuring entity shall make available to suppliers tender documentation that
includes all information necessary to permit suppliers to prepare and submit
responsive tenders. Unless already provided in the notice of intended procurement,
such documentation shall include a complete description of:

138

(a)

the procurement, including the nature and the quantity of the goods or services
to be procured or, if the quantity is not known, the estimated quantity and any
requirements to be fulfilled, including any technical specifications, conformity
assessment certification, plans, drawings or instructional materials;

(b)

any conditions for participation of suppliers, including a list of information and
documents that suppliers are required to submit in connection with the
conditions for participation;

(c)

all evaluation criteria the entity will apply in the awarding of the contract, and,
unless price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of that criteria;

(d)

if the procuring entity will conduct the procurement by electronic means, any
authentication and encryption requirements or other requirements related to the
submission of information by electronic means;

(e)

if the procuring entity will hold an electronic auction, the rules, including
identification of the elements of the tender related to the evaluation criteria, on
which the auction will be conducted;

(f)

if there will be a public opening of tenders, the date, time and place for the
opening and, if appropriate, the persons authorised to be present;

(g)

any other terms or conditions, including terms of payment and any limitation
on the means by which tenders may be submitted, such as whether on paper or
by electronic means; and

(h)

any dates for the delivery of goods or the supply of services.

8.

In establishing any date for the delivery of goods or the supply of services being
procured, a procuring entity shall take into account such factors as the complexity of
the procurement, the extent of subcontracting anticipated and the realistic time
required for production, de-stocking and transport of goods from the point of supply
or for supply of services.

9.

The evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender
documentation may include, among others, price and other cost factors, quality,
technical merit, environmental characteristics and terms of delivery.

10.

A procuring entity shall promptly:
(a)

make available tender documentation to ensure that interested suppliers have
sufficient time to submit responsive tenders;

(b)

provide, on request, the tender documentation to any interested supplier; and

(c)

reply to any reasonable request for relevant information by any interested or
participating supplier, provided that such information does not give that
supplier an advantage over other suppliers.

Modifications
11.

If, prior to the award of a contract, a procuring entity modifies the criteria or
requirements set out in the notice of intended procurement or tender documentation
provided to participating suppliers, or amends or reissues a notice or tender
documentation, it shall transmit in writing all such modifications or amended or reissued notice or tender documentation:
139

(a)

to all suppliers that are participating at the time of the modification,
amendment or re-issuance, if such suppliers are known to the entity, and in all
other cases, in the same manner as the original information was made
available; and

(b)

in adequate time to allow such suppliers to modify and re-submit amended
tenders, as appropriate.
Article 19.10
Time-periods

General
1.

A procuring entity shall, consistent with its own reasonable needs, provide sufficient
time for suppliers to prepare and submit requests for participation and responsive
tenders, taking into account such factors as:
(a)

the nature and complexity of the procurement;

(b)

the extent of subcontracting anticipated; and

(c)

the time necessary for transmitting tenders by non-electronic means from
foreign as well as domestic points if electronic means are not used.

These time-periods, including any extension of the time-periods, shall be the same
for all interested or participating suppliers.
Deadlines
2.

A procuring entity that uses selective tendering shall establish that the final date for
the submission of requests for participation shall not, in principle, be less than
25 days from the date of publication of the notice of intended procurement. If a state
of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity renders this time-period
impracticable, the time-period may be reduced to not less than 10 days.

3.

Except as provided for in paragraphs 4, 5, 7 and 8, a procuring entity shall establish
that the final date for the submission of tenders shall not be less than 40 days from
the date on which:

4.

(a)

in the case of open tendering, the notice of intended procurement is published;
or

(b)

in the case of selective tendering, the entity notifies suppliers that they will be
invited to submit tenders, whether or not it uses a multi-use list.

A procuring entity may reduce the time-period for tendering established in
accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than 10 days if:
(a)

the procuring entity has published a notice of planned procurement as
described in Article 19.6.5 at least 40 days and not more than 12 months in
advance of the publication of the notice of intended procurement, and the
notice of planned procurement contains:
(i)

a description of the procurement;

(ii)

the approximate final dates for the submission of tenders or requests for
participation;
140

(iii) a statement that interested suppliers should express their interest in the
procurement to the procuring entity;
(iv) the address from which documents relating to the procurement may be
obtained; and
(v)

5.

as much of the information that is required for the notice of intended
procurement under Article 19.6.3, as is available;

(b)

the procuring entity, for contracts of a recurring nature, indicates in an initial
notice of intended procurement that subsequent notices will provide timeperiods for tendering based on this paragraph; or

(c)

a state of urgency duly substantiated by the procuring entity renders the timeperiod for tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3 impracticable.

A procuring entity may reduce the time-period for tendering established in
accordance with paragraph 3 by five days for each one of the following
circumstances:
(a)

the notice of intended procurement is published by electronic means;

(b)

all the tender documentation is made available by electronic means from the
date of the publication of the notice of intended procurement; and

(c)

the entity accepts tenders by electronic means.

6.

The use of paragraph 5, in conjunction with paragraph 4, shall in no case result in the
reduction of the time-period for tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3
to less than 10 days from the date on which the notice of intended procurement is
published.

7.

Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article, if a procuring entity purchases
commercial goods or services, or any combination thereof, it may reduce the timeperiod for tendering established in accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than
13 days, provided that it publishes by electronic means, at the same time, both the
notice of intended procurement and the tender documentation. In addition, if the
entity accepts tenders for commercial goods or services by electronic means, it may
reduce the time-period established in accordance with paragraph 3 to not less than
10 days.

8.

If a procuring entity covered under Annexes 19-2 or 19-3 has selected all or a limited
number of qualified suppliers, the time-period for tendering may be fixed by mutual
agreement between the procuring entity and the selected suppliers. In the absence of
agreement, the period shall not be less than 10 days.
Article 19.11
Negotiation

1.

A Party may provide for its procuring entities to conduct negotiations with suppliers:
(a)

if the entity has indicated its intent to conduct negotiations in the notice of
intended procurement required under Article 19.6.3; or

141

(b)

2.

if it appears from the evaluation that no tender is obviously the most
advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria set out in the notice of
intended procurement or tender documentation.

A procuring entity shall:
(a)

ensure that any elimination of suppliers participating in negotiations is carried
out in accordance with the evaluation criteria set out in the notice of intended
procurement or tender documentation; and

(b)

if negotiations are concluded, provide a common deadline for the remaining
participating suppliers to submit any new or revised tenders.
Article 19.12
Limited tendering

1.

Provided that it does not use this provision for the purpose of avoiding competition
among suppliers or in a manner that discriminates against suppliers of the other Party
or protects domestic suppliers, a procuring entity may use limited tendering and may
choose not to apply Articles 19.6 through 19.8, paragraphs 7 through 11 of Article
19.9, and Articles 19.10, 19.11, 19.13 and 19.14 under any of the following
circumstances:
(a)

if:
(i)

no tenders were submitted or no suppliers requested participation;

(ii)

no tenders that conform to the essential requirements of the tender
documentation were submitted;

(iii) no suppliers satisfied the conditions for participation; or
(iv) the tenders submitted have been collusive,
provided that the requirements of the tender documentation are not
substantially modified;
(b)

if the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier and no
reasonable alternative or substitute goods or services exist for any of the
following reasons:
(i)

the requirement is for a work of art;

(ii)

the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; or

(iii) due to an absence of competition for technical reasons;
(c)

for additional deliveries by the original supplier of goods or services that were
not included in the initial procurement if a change of supplier for such
additional goods or services:
(i)

cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as requirements
of interchangeability or interoperability with existing equipment,
software, services or installations procured under the initial procurement;
and

142

(ii)

2.

would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs
for the procuring entity;

(d)

only when strictly necessary if, for reasons of extreme urgency brought about
by events unforeseeable by the procuring entity, the goods or services could
not be obtained in time using open tendering or selective tendering;

(e)

for goods purchased on a commodity market;

(f)

if a procuring entity procures a prototype or a first good or service that is
developed at its request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for
research, experiment, study or original development. Original development of a
first good or service may include limited production or supply in order to
incorporate the results of field testing and to demonstrate that the good or
service is suitable for production or supply in quantity to acceptable quality
standards, but does not include quantity production or supply to establish
commercial viability or to recover research and development costs;

(g)

for purchases made under exceptionally advantageous conditions that only
arise in the very short term in the case of unusual disposals such as those
arising from liquidation, receivership or bankruptcy, but not for routine
purchases from regular suppliers; or

(h)

if a contract is awarded to a winner of a design contest provided that:
(i)

the contest has been organised in a manner that is consistent with the
principles of this Chapter, in particular relating to the publication of a
notice of intended procurement; and

(ii)

the participants are judged by an independent jury with a view to a design
contract being awarded to a winner.

A procuring entity shall prepare a report in writing on each contract awarded under
paragraph 1. The report shall include the name of the procuring entity, the value and
kind of goods or services procured and a statement indicating the circumstances and
conditions described in paragraph 1 that justified the use of limited tendering.
Article 19.13
Electronic auctions

If a procuring entity intends to conduct a covered procurement using an electronic auction, the
entity shall provide each participant, before commencing the electronic auction, with:
(a)

the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, that is based
on the evaluation criteria set out in the tender documentation and that will be used in
the automatic ranking or re-ranking during the auction;

(b)

the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of its tender if the contract is to be
awarded on the basis of the most advantageous tender; and

(c)

any other relevant information relating to the conduct of the auction.
Article 19.14
Treatment of tenders and awarding of contracts
143

Treatment of Tenders
1.

A procuring entity shall receive, open and treat all tenders under procedures that
guarantee the fairness and impartiality of the procurement process, and the
confidentiality of tenders.

2.

A procuring entity shall not penalise any supplier whose tender is received after the
time specified for receiving tenders if the delay is due solely to mishandling on the
part of the procuring entity.

3.

If a procuring entity provides a supplier with an opportunity to correct unintentional
errors of form between the opening of tenders and the awarding of the contract, the
procuring entity shall provide the same opportunity to all participating suppliers.

Awarding of Contracts
4.

To be considered for an award, a tender shall be submitted in writing and shall, at the
time of opening, comply with the essential requirements set out in the notices and
tender documentation and be from a supplier that satisfies the conditions for
participation.

5.

Unless a procuring entity determines that it is not in the public interest to award a
contract, the entity shall award the contract to the supplier that the entity has
determined to be capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract and that, based solely
on the evaluation criteria specified in the notices and tender documentation, has
submitted:
(a)

the most advantageous tender; or

(b)

if price is the sole criterion, the lowest price.

6.

If a procuring entity receives a tender with a price that is abnormally lower than the
prices in other tenders submitted, it may verify with the supplier that it satisfies the
conditions for participation and is capable of fulfilling the terms of the contract.

7.

A procuring entity shall not use options, cancel a procurement or modify awarded
contracts in a manner that circumvents the obligations under this Chapter.
Article 19.15
Transparency of procurement information

Information Provided to Suppliers
1.

A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating suppliers of the entity’s
contract award decisions and, on the request of a supplier, shall do so in writing.
Subject to Articles 19.6.2 and 19.6.3, a procuring entity shall, on request, provide an
unsuccessful supplier with an explanation of the reasons why the entity did not select
its tender and the relative advantages of the successful supplier’s tender.

Publication of Award Information
2.

Not later than 72 days after the award of each contract covered by this Chapter, a
procuring entity shall publish a notice in the appropriate paper or electronic medium
listed in Annex 19-8. If the entity publishes the notice only in an electronic medium,

144

the information shall remain readily accessible for a reasonable period of time. The
notice shall include at least the following information:
(a)

a description of the goods or services procured;

(b)

the name and address of the procuring entity;

(c)

the name and address of the successful supplier;

(d)

the value of the successful tender or the highest and lowest offers taken into
account in the award of the contract;

(e)

the date of award; and

(f)

the type of procurement method used, and in cases where limited tendering was
used in accordance with Article 19.12, a description of the circumstances
justifying the use of limited tendering.

Maintenance of Documentation, Reports and Electronic Traceability
3.

Each procuring entity shall, for a period of at least three years from the date it awards
a contract, maintain:
(a)

the documentation and reports of tendering procedures and contract awards
relating to covered procurement, including the reports required under
Article 19.12; and

(b)

data that ensure the appropriate traceability of the conduct of covered
procurement by electronic means.

Collection and Reporting of Statistics
4.

Each Party shall collect and report to the Committee on Government Procurement
statistics on its contracts covered by this Chapter. Each report shall cover one year
and be submitted within two years of the end of the reporting period, and shall
contain:
(a)

for Annex 19-1 procuring entities:
(i)

the number and total value, for all such entities, of all contracts covered
by this Chapter;

(ii)

the number and total value of all contracts covered by this Chapter
awarded by each such entity, broken down by categories of goods and
services according to an internationally recognised uniform classification
system; and

(iii) the number and total value of all contracts covered by this Chapter
awarded by each such entity under limited tendering;
(b)

for Annexes 19-2 and 19-3 procuring entities, the number and total value of
contracts covered by this Chapter awarded by all such entities, broken down by
Annex; and

(c)

estimates for the data required under sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), with an
explanation of the methodology used to develop the estimates, if it is not
feasible to provide the data.

145

5.

If a Party publishes its statistics on an official website, in a manner that is consistent
with the requirements of paragraph 4, the Party may, instead of reporting to the
Committee on Government Procurement, provide a link to the website, together with
any instructions necessary to access and use such statistics.

6.

If a Party requires notices concerning awarded contracts, pursuant to paragraph 2, to
be published electronically and if such notices are accessible to the public through a
single database in a form permitting analysis of the covered contracts, the Party may,
instead of reporting to the Committee on Government Procurement, provide a link to
the website, together with any instructions necessary to access and use such data.
Article 19.16
Disclosure of information

Provision of Information to Parties
1.

On request of the other Party, a Party shall provide promptly any information
necessary to determine whether a procurement was conducted fairly, impartially and
in accordance with this Chapter, including information on the characteristics and
relative advantages of the successful tender. In cases where release of the
information would prejudice competition in future tenders, the Party that receives the
information shall not disclose it to any supplier, except after consulting with, and
obtaining the consent of, the Party that provided the information.

Non-Disclosure of Information
2.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a Party, including its procuring
entities, shall not provide to any particular supplier information that might prejudice
fair competition between suppliers.

3.

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party, including its procuring
entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential information if
disclosure:
(a)

would impede law enforcement;

(b)

might prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c)

would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular persons,
including the protection of intellectual property; or

(d)

would otherwise be contrary to the public interest.
Article 19.17
Domestic review procedures

1.

Each Party shall provide a timely, effective, transparent and non-discriminatory
administrative or judicial review procedure through which a supplier may challenge:
(a)

a breach of the Chapter; or

(b)

if the supplier does not have a right to challenge directly a breach of the
Chapter under the domestic law of a Party, a failure to comply with a Party’s
measures implementing this Chapter,
146

arising in the context of a covered procurement, in which the supplier has, or has
had, an interest. The procedural rules for all challenges shall be in writing and made
generally available.
2.

In the event of a complaint by a supplier, arising in the context of covered
procurement in which the supplier has, or has had, an interest, that there has been a
breach or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1, the Party of the procuring entity
conducting the procurement shall encourage the entity and the supplier to seek
resolution of the complaint through consultations. The entity shall accord impartial
and timely consideration to any such complaint in a manner that is not prejudicial to
the supplier’s participation in ongoing or future procurement or its right to seek
corrective measures under the administrative or judicial review procedure.

3.

Each supplier shall be allowed a sufficient period of time to prepare and submit a
challenge, which in no case shall be less than 10 days from the time when the basis
of the challenge became known or reasonably should have become known to the
supplier.

4.

Each Party shall establish or designate at least one impartial administrative or
judicial authority that is independent of its procuring entities to receive and review a
challenge by a supplier arising in the context of a covered procurement.

5.

If a body other than an authority referred to in paragraph 4 initially reviews a
challenge, the Party shall ensure that the supplier may appeal the initial decision to
an impartial administrative or judicial authority that is independent of the procuring
entity whose procurement is the subject of the challenge.

6.

Each Party shall ensure that a review body that is not a court shall have its decision
subject to judicial review or have procedures that provide that:

7.

(a)

the procuring entity shall respond in writing to the challenge and disclose all
relevant documents to the review body;

(b)

the participants to the proceedings (“participants”) shall have the right to be
heard prior to a decision of the review body being made on the challenge;

(c)

the participants shall have the right to be represented and accompanied;

(d)

the participants shall have access to all proceedings;

(e)

the participants shall have the right to request that the proceedings take place in
public and that witnesses may be presented; and

(f)

the review body shall make its decisions or recommendations in a timely
fashion, in writing, and shall include an explanation of the basis for each
decision or recommendation.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that provide for:
(a)

rapid interim measures to preserve the supplier’s opportunity to participate in
the procurement. Such interim measures may result in suspension of the
procurement process. The procedures may provide that overriding adverse
consequences for the interests concerned, including the public interest, may be
taken into account when deciding whether such measures should be applied.
Just cause for not acting shall be provided in writing; and

147

(b)

8.

corrective action or compensation for the loss or damages suffered, which may
be limited to either the costs for the preparation of the tender or the costs
relating to the challenge, or both, if a review body determines that there has
been a breach or a failure as referred to in paragraph 1.

Not later than ten years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will
take up negotiations to further develop the quality of remedies, including a possible
commitment to introduce or maintain pre-contractual remedies.
Article 19.18
Modifications and rectifications to coverage

1.

A Party may modify or rectify its Annexes to this Chapter.

Modifications
2.

3.

4.

When a Party modifies an Annex to this Chapter, the Party shall:
(a)

notify the other Party in writing; and

(b)

include in the notification a proposal of appropriate compensatory adjustments
to the other Party to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing
prior to the modification.

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph 2(b), a Party need not provide compensatory
adjustments if:
(a)

the modification in question is negligible in its effect; or

(b)

the modification covers an entity over which the Party has effectively
eliminated its control or influence.

If the other Party disputes that:
(a)

an adjustment proposed under sub-paragraph 2(b) is adequate to maintain a
comparable level of mutually agreed coverage;

(b)

the modification is negligible in its effect; or

(c)

the modification covers an entity over which the Party has effectively
eliminated its control or influence under sub-paragraph 3(b),

it must object in writing within 45 days of receipt of the notification referred to in
sub-paragraph 2(a) or be deemed to have accepted the adjustment or modification,
including for the purposes of Chapter 29 (Dispute Settlement).
Rectifications
5.

The following changes to a Party’s Annexes shall be considered a rectification,
provided that they do not affect the mutually agreed coverage provided for in this
Agreement:
(a)

a change in the name of an entity;

(b)

a merger of two or more entities listed within an Annex; and

(c)

the separation of an entity listed in an Annex into two or more entities that are
all added to the entities listed in the same Annex.

148

6.

In the case of proposed rectifications to a Party's Annexes, the Party shall notify the
other Party every two years, in line with the cycle of notifications provided for under
the Agreement on Government Procurement, contained in Annex 4 of the WTO
Agreement, following the entry into force of this Agreement.

7.

A Party may notify the other Party of an objection to a proposed rectification within
45 days from having received the notification. If a Party submits an objection, it shall
set out the reasons why it believes the proposed rectification is not a change provided
for in paragraph 5 of this Article, and describe the effect of the proposed rectification
on the mutually agreed coverage provided for in the Agreement. If no such objection
is submitted in writing within 45 days after having received the notification, the
Party shall be deemed to have agreed to the proposed rectification.
Article 19.19
Committee on Government Procurement

1.

The Committee on Government Procurement, established under Article 26.2.1(e), is
to be composed of representatives from each Party and shall meet, as necessary, for
the purpose of providing the Parties the opportunity to consult on any matters
relating to the operation of this Chapter or the furtherance of its objectives, and to
carry out other responsibilities as may be assigned to it by the Parties.

2.

The Committee on Government Procurement shall meet, upon request of a Party, to:

3.

(a)

consider issues regarding public procurement that are referred to it by a Party;

(b)

exchange information relating to the public procurement opportunities in each
Party;

(c)

discuss any other matters related to the operation of this Chapter; and

(d)

consider the promotion of coordinated activities to facilitate access for
suppliers to procurement opportunities in the territory of each Party. These
activities may include information sessions, in particular with a view to
improving electronic access to publicly-available information on each Party’s
procurement regime, and initiatives to facilitate access for small and mediumsized enterprises.

Each Party shall submit statistics relevant to the procurement covered by this
Chapter, as set out in Article 19.15, annually to the Committee on Government
Procurement.

149

CHAPTER TWENTY
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
SECTION A
General Provisions
Article 20.1
Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a)

facilitate the production and commercialisation of innovative and creative products,
and the provision of services, between the Parties; and

(b)

achieve an adequate and effective level of protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights.
Article 20.2
Nature and scope of obligations

1.

The provisions of this Chapter complement the rights and obligations between the
Parties under the TRIPS Agreement.

2.

Each Party shall be free to determine the appropriate method of implementing the
provisions of this Agreement within its own legal system and practice.

3.

This Agreement does not create any obligation with respect to the distribution of
resources as between enforcement of intellectual property rights and enforcement of
law in general.
Article 20.3
Public health concerns

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health (“Doha Declaration”), adopted on 14 November 2001
by the WTO Ministerial Conference. In interpreting and implementing the rights and
obligations under this Chapter, the Parties shall ensure consistency with this
Declaration.

2.

The Parties shall contribute to the implementation of and respect the Decision of the
WTO General Council of 30 August 2003 on Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration,
as well as the Protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement, done at Geneva on 6
December 2005.
Article 20.4
Exhaustion

This Chapter does not affect the freedom of the Parties to determine whether and under what
conditions the exhaustion of intellectual property rights applies.
150

Article 20.5
Disclosure of information
This Chapter does not require a Party to disclose information that would otherwise be
contrary to its law or exempt from disclosure under its law concerning access to information
and privacy.
SECTION B
Standards Concerning Intellectual Property Rights
Article 20.6
Definition
For the purposes of this Section:
pharmaceutical product means a product including a chemical drug, biologic drug, vaccine
or radiopharmaceutical, that is manufactured, sold or represented for use in:
(a)

making a medical diagnosis, treating, mitigating or preventing disease, disorder, or
abnormal physical state, or its symptoms, or

(b)

restoring, correcting, or modifying physiological functions.
Sub-section A
Copyright and related rights
Article 20.7
Protection granted

1.

2.

The Parties shall comply with the following international agreements:
(a)

Articles 2 through 20 of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary
and Artistic Works, done at Paris on 24 July 1971;

(b)

Articles 1 through 14 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty, done at Geneva on 20
December 1996;

(c)

Articles 1 through 23 of the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty,
done at Geneva on 20 December 1996; and

(d)

Articles 1 through 22 of the International Convention for the Protection of
Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, done
at Rome on 26 October 1961.

To the extent permitted by the treaties referred to in paragraph 1, this Chapter shall
not restrict each Party’s ability to limit intellectual property protection that it accords
to performances to those performances that are fixed in phonograms.
Article 20.8
Broadcasting and communication to the public

151

1.

Each Party shall provide performers the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit the
broadcasting by wireless means and the communication to the public of their
performances, except where the performance is itself already a broadcast
performance or is made from a fixation.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that a single equitable remuneration is paid by the user if a
phonogram published for commercial purposes, or a reproduction of such
phonogram, is used for broadcasting by wireless means or for any communication to
the public, and to ensure that this remuneration is shared between the relevant
performers and phonogram producers. Each Party may, in the absence of an
agreement between the performers and producers of phonograms, lay down the
conditions as to the sharing of this remuneration between them.
Article 20.9
Protection of technological measures

1.

For the purposes of this Article, technological measures means any technology,
device, or component that, in the normal course of its operation, is designed to
prevent or restrict acts, in respect of works, performances, or phonograms, that are
not authorised by authors, performers or producers of phonograms, as provided for
by the law of a Party. Without prejudice to the scope of copyright or related rights
contained in the law of a Party, technological measures shall be deemed effective
where the use of protected works, performances, or phonograms is controlled by
authors, performers or producers of phonograms through the application of a relevant
access control or protection process, such as encryption or scrambling, or a copy
control mechanism, that achieves the objective of protection.

2.

Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention of effective technological measures that are used by
authors, performers or producers of phonograms in connection with the exercise of
their rights in, and that restrict acts in respect of, their works, performances, and
phonograms, which are not authorised by the authors, the performers or the
producers of phonograms concerned or permitted by law.

3.

In order to provide the adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies referred
to in paragraph 2, each Party shall provide protection against at least:
(a)

(b)

to the extent provided by its law:
(i)

the unauthorised circumvention of an effective technological measure
carried out knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know; and

(ii)

the offering to the public by marketing of a device or product, including
computer programs, or a service, as a means of circumventing an
effective technological measure; and

the manufacture, importation, or distribution of a device or product, including
computer programs, or provision of a service that:
(i)

is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing an
effective technological measure; or

152

(ii)

has only a limited commercially significant purpose other than
circumventing an effective technological measure.

4.

Under paragraph 3, the term “to the extent provided by its law” means that each
Party has flexibility in implementing sub-paragraphs (a)(i) and (ii).

5.

In implementing paragraphs 2 and 3, a Party shall not be obliged to require that the
design of, or the design and selection of parts and components for, a consumer
electronics, telecommunications, or computing product provide for a response to any
particular technological measure, so long as the product does not otherwise
contravene that Party’s measures implementing these paragraphs. The intention of
this provision is that this Agreement does not require a Party to mandate
interoperability in its law: there is no obligation for the information communication
technology industry to design devices, products, components, or services to
correspond to certain technological measures.

6.

In providing adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies pursuant to
paragraph 2, a Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations or exceptions to
measures implementing the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3. The obligations set
forth in paragraphs 2 and 3 are without prejudice to the rights, limitations,
exceptions, or defences to copyright or related rights infringement under the law of a
Party.
Article 20.10
Protection of rights management information

1.

For the purposes of this Article, rights management information means:
(a)

information that identifies the work, the performance, or the phonogram; the
author of the work, the performer of the performance, or the producer of the
phonogram; or the owner of any right in the work, performance, or phonogram;

(b)

information about the terms and conditions of use of the work, performance, or
phonogram; or

(c)

any numbers or codes that represent the information described in (a) and (b)
above;

when any of these items of information is attached to a copy of a work, performance,
or phonogram, or appears in connection with the communication or making available
of a work, performance, or phonogram to the public.
2.

To protect electronic rights management information, each Party shall provide
adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against any person knowingly
performing, without authority, any of the following acts knowing, or having
reasonable grounds to know, that it will induce, enable, facilitate, or conceal an
infringement of any copyright or related rights:
(a)

to remove or alter any electronic rights management information; or

(b)

to distribute, import for distribution, broadcast, communicate, or make
available to the public copies of works, performances, or phonograms,
knowing that electronic rights management information has been removed or
altered without authority.
153

3.

In providing adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies pursuant to
paragraph 2, a Party may adopt or maintain appropriate limitations or exceptions to
measures implementing paragraph 2. The obligations set forth in paragraph 2 are
without prejudice to the rights, limitations, exceptions, or defences to copyright or
related rights infringement under the law of a Party.
Article 20.11
Liability of intermediary service providers

1.

Subject to the other paragraphs of this Article, each Party shall provide limitations or
exceptions in its law regarding the liability of service providers, when acting as
intermediaries, for infringements of copyright or related rights that take place on or
through communication networks, in relation to the provision or use of their services.

2.

The limitations or exceptions referred to in paragraph 1:
(a)

shall cover at least the following functions:
(i)

hosting of the information at the request of a user of the hosting services;

(ii)

caching carried out through an automated process, when the service
provider:
(A) does not modify the information other than for technical reasons;
(B)

ensures that any directions related to the caching of the information
that are specified in a manner widely recognised and used by
industry are complied with; and

(C)

does not interfere with the use of technology that is lawful and
widely recognised and used by the industry in order to obtain data
on the use of the information; and

(iii) mere conduit, which consists of the provision of the means to transmit
information provided by a user, or the means of access to a
communication network; and
(b)

may also cover other functions, including providing an information location
tool, by making reproductions of copyright material in an automated manner,
and communicating the reproductions.

3.

The eligibility for the limitations or exceptions referred to in this Article may not be
conditioned on the service provider monitoring its service, or affirmatively seeking
facts indicating infringing activity.

4.

Each Party may prescribe in its domestic law, conditions for service providers to
qualify for the limitations or exceptions in this Article. Without prejudice to the
above, each Party may establish appropriate procedures for effective notifications of
claimed infringement, and effective counter-notifications by those whose material is
removed or disabled through mistake or misidentification.

5.

This Article is without prejudice to the availability in the law of a Party of other
defences, limitations and exceptions to the infringement of copyright or related
rights. This Article shall not affect the possibility of a court or administrative

154

authority, in accordance with the legal system of a Party, of requiring the service
provider to terminate or prevent an infringement.
Article 20.12
Camcording
Each Party may provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied in accordance
with its laws and regulations against a person who, without authorisation of the theatre
manager or the holder of the copyright in a cinematographic work, makes a copy of that work
or any part thereof, from a performance of the work in a motion picture exhibition facility
open to the public.
Sub-section B
Trademarks
Article 20.13
International agreements
Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with Articles 1 through 22 of the
Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, done at Singapore on 27 March 2006, and to
accede to the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International
Registration of Marks, done at Madrid on 27 June 1989.
Article 20.14
Registration procedure
Each Party shall provide for a system for the registration of trademarks in which reasons for
the refusal to register a trademark are communicated in writing to the applicant, who will
have the opportunity to contest that refusal and to appeal a final refusal to a judicial authority.
Each Party shall provide for the possibility of filing oppositions either against trademark
applications or against trademark registrations. Each Party shall provide a publicly available
electronic database of trademark applications and trademark registrations.
Article 20.15
Exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark
Each Party shall provide for the fair use of descriptive terms, including terms descriptive of
geographical origin, as a limited exception to the rights conferred by a trademark. In
determining what constitutes fair use, account shall be taken of the legitimate interests of the
owner of the trademark and of third parties. Each Party may provide other limited exceptions,
provided that these exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the owner of the
trademark and of third parties.
Sub-section C
Geographical Indications

155

Article 20.16
Definitions
For the purposes of this Sub-section:
geographical indication means an indication which identifies an agricultural product or
foodstuff as originating in the territory of a Party, or a region or locality in that territory,
where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the product is essentially
attributable to its geographical origin; and
product class means a product class listed in Annex 20-C.
Article 20.17
Scope
This Sub-section applies to geographical indications identifying products falling within one of
the product classes listed in Annex 20-C.
Article 20.18
Listed geographical indications
For the purposes of this Sub-section:
(a)

the indications listed in Part A of Annex 20-A are geographical indications which
identify a product as originating in the territory of the European Union or a region or
locality in that territory; and

(b)

the indications listed in Part B of Annex 20-A are geographical indications which
identify a product as originating in the territory of Canada or a region or locality in
that territory.
Article 20.19
Protection for geographical indications listed in Annex 20-A

1

Having examined the geographical indications of the other Party, each Party shall
protect them according to the level of protection set out in this Sub-section.

2.

Each Party shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent:
(a)

(b)

the use of a geographical indication of the other Party listed in Annex 20-A for
a product that falls within the product class specified in Annex 20-A for that
geographical indication and that either:
(i)

does not originate in the place of origin specified in Annex 20-A for that
geographical indication; or

(ii)

does originate in the place of origin specified in Annex 20-A for that
geographical indication but was not produced or manufactured in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the other Party that would
apply if the product were for consumption in the other Party;

the use of any means in the designation or presentation of a good that indicates
or suggests that the good in question originates in a geographical area other
156

than the true place of origin in a manner which misleads the public as to the
geographical origin of the good; and
(c)

any other use which constitutes an act of unfair competition within the meaning
of Article 10bis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property (1967) done at Stockholm on 14 July 1967.

3.

The protection referred to in sub-paragraph 2(a) shall be provided even where the
true origin of the product is indicated or the geographical indication is used in
translation or accompanied by expressions such as “kind”, “type”, “style”,
“imitation” or the like.

4.

Each Party shall provide for enforcement by administrative action, to the extent
provided for by its law, to prohibit a person from manufacturing, preparing,
packaging, labelling, selling or importing or advertising a food commodity in a
manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous
impression regarding its origin.

5.

In accordance with paragraph 4, each Party will provide for administrative action in
respect of complaints related to the labelling of products, including their
presentation, in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create
an erroneous impression regarding their origin.

6.

The registration of a trademark which contains or consists of a geographical
indication of the other Party listed in Annex 20-A shall be refused or invalidated,
ex officio if a Party's legislation so permits or at the request of an interested party,
with respect to a product that falls within the product class specified in Annex 20-A
for that geographical indication and that does not originate in the place of origin
specified in Annex 20-A for that geographical indication.

7.

There shall be no obligation under this Sub-section to protect geographical
indications which are not or cease to be protected in their place of origin, or which
have fallen into disuse in that place. If a geographical indication of a Party listed in
Annex 20-A ceases to be protected in its place of origin or falls into disuse in that
place, that Party shall notify the other Party and request cancellation.
Article 20.20
Homonymous geographical indications

1.

In the case of homonymous geographical indications of the Parties for products
falling within the same product class, each Party shall determine the practical
conditions under which the homonymous indications in question will be
differentiated from each other, taking into account the need to ensure equitable
treatment of the producers concerned and that consumers are not misled.

2.

If a Party, in the context of negotiations with a third country, proposes to protect a
geographical indication identifying a product originating in the third country, if that
indication is homonymous with a geographical indication of the other Party listed in
Annex 20-A and if that product falls within the product class specified in Annex 20A for the homonymous geographical indication of the other Party, the other Party
shall be informed and be given the opportunity to comment before the geographical
indication becomes protected.
157

Article 20.21
Exceptions
1.

Notwithstanding Articles 20.19.2 and 20.19.3, Canada shall not be required to
provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent the use of the terms listed in
Part A of Annex 20-A and identified by one asterisk26 when the use of such terms is
accompanied by expressions such as “kind”, “type”, “style”, “imitation” or the like
and is in combination with a legible and visible indication of the geographical origin
of the product concerned.

2.

Notwithstanding Articles 20.19.2 and 20.19.3, the protection of the geographical
indications listed in Part A of Annex 20-A and identified by one asterisk27 shall not
prevent the use in the territory of Canada of any of these indications by any persons,
including their successors and assignees, who made commercial use of those
indications with regard to products in the class of “cheeses” preceding the date of 18
October 2013.

3.

Notwithstanding Articles 20.19.2 and 20.19.3, the protection of the geographical
indication listed in Part A of Annex 20-A and identified by two asterisks shall not
prevent the use of this indication by any persons, including their successors and
assignees, who made commercial use of this indication with regard to products in the
class of “fresh, frozen and processed meats” for at least five years preceding the date
of 18 October 2013. A transitional period of five years from the entry into force of
this Article, during which the use of the above indication shall not be prevented, shall
apply to any other persons, including their successors and assignees, who made
commercial use of those indications with regard to products in the class of “fresh,
frozen and processed meats”, for less than five years preceding the date of 18
October 2013.

4.

Notwithstanding Articles 20.19.2 and 20.19.3, the protection of the geographical
indications listed in Part A of Annex 20-A and identified by three asterisks shall not
prevent the use of those indications by any persons, including their successors and
assignees, who made commercial use of those indications with regard to products in
the classes of “dry-cured meats” and “cheeses“, respectively, for at least ten years
preceding the date of 18 October 2013. A transitional period of five years from the
entry into force of this Article, during which the use of the above indications shall
not be prevented, shall apply to any other persons, including their successors and
assignees, who made commercial use of those indications with regard to products in
the class of “dry-cured meats” and “cheeses”, respectively, for less than ten years
preceding the date of 18 October 2013.

5.

If a trademark has been applied for or registered in good faith, or if rights to a
trademark have been acquired through use in good faith, in a Party before the
applicable date set out in paragraph 6, measures adopted to implement this Subsection in that Party shall not prejudice the eligibility for or the validity of the
registration of the trademark, or the right to use the trademark, on the basis that the
trademark is identical with, or similar to, a geographical indication.

6.

For the purposes of paragraph 5 the applicable date is:

26
27

For greater certainty, this paragraph applies equally to the term “Feta”.
For greater certainty, this paragraph applies equally to the term “Feta”.

158

(a)

in respect of a geographical indication listed in Annex 20-A on the date of
signing of this Agreement, the date of coming into force of this Sub-section; or

(b)

in respect of a geographical indication added to Annex 20-A after the date of
signing of this Agreement pursuant to Article 20.22, the date on which the
geographical indication is added.

7.

If a translation of a geographical indication is identical with or contains within it a
term customary in common language as the common name for a product in the
territory of a Party, or if a geographical indication is not identical with but contains
within it such a term, the provisions of this Sub-section shall not prejudice the right
of any person to use that term in association with that product in the territory of that
Party.

8.

Nothing shall prevent the use in the territory of a Party, with respect to any product,
of a customary name of a plant variety or an animal breed, existing in the territory of
that Party as of the date of entry into force of this Sub-section.

9.

A Party may provide that any request made under this Sub-section in connection with
the use or registration of a trademark must be presented within five years after the
adverse use of the protected indication has become generally known in that Party or
after the date of registration of the trademark in that Party provided that the
trademark has been published by that date, if such date is earlier than the date on
which the adverse use became generally known in that Party, provided that the
geographical indication is not used or registered in bad faith.

10.

The provisions of this Sub-section shall not prejudice the right of any person to use,
in the course of trade, that person’s name or the name of that person’s predecessor in
business, except where such name is used in such a manner as to mislead the public.

11.

(a)

The provisions of this Sub-section shall not prejudice the right of any person to
use, or to register in Canada a trademark containing or consisting of, any of the
terms listed in Part A of Annex 20-B; and

(b)

Sub-paragraph (a) does not apply to the terms listed in Part A of Annex 20-B in
respect of any use that would mislead the public as to the geographical origin
of the goods.

12.

The use in Canada of the terms listed in Part B of Annex 20-B shall not be subject to
the provisions of this Sub-section.

13.

An assignment as referred to in paragraphs 2 through 4 does not include the transfer
of the right to use a geographical indication on its own.
Article 20.22
Amendments to Annex 20-A

1.

The CETA Joint Committee, established under Article 26.1 (The CETA Joint
Committee), acting by consensus and on a recommendation by the CETA Committee
on Geographical Indications, may decide to amend Annex 20-A by adding
geographical indications or by removing geographical indications which have ceased
to be protected or have fallen into disuse in their place of origin.

159

2.

A geographical indication shall not in principle be added to Part A of Annex 20-A, if
it is a name that on the date of the signing of this Agreement is listed in the relevant
Register of the European Union with a status of “Registered”, in respect of a Member
State of the European Union.

3.

A geographical indication identifying a product originating in a particular Party shall
not be added to Annex 20-A:
(a)

if it is identical to a trademark that has been registered in the other Party in
respect of the same or similar products, or to a trademark in respect of which in
the other Party rights have been acquired through use in good faith and an
application has been filed in respect of the same or similar products;

(b)

if it is identical to the customary name of a plant variety or an animal breed
existing in the other Party; or

(c)

if it is identical with the term customary in common language as the common
name for such product in the other Party.
Article 20.23
Other protection

The provisions of this Sub-section are without prejudice to the right to seek recognition and
protection of a geographical indication under the relevant law of a Party.
Sub-section D
Designs
Article 20.24
International agreements
Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to accede to the Geneva Act of the Hague
Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Industrial Designs, done at Geneva
on 2 July 1999.
Article 20.25
Relationship to copyright
The subject matter of a design right may be protected under copyright law if the conditions
for this protection are met. The extent to which, and the conditions under which, such a
protection is conferred, including the level of originality required, shall be determined by each
Party.
Sub-section E
Patents
Article 20.26
International agreements

160

Each Party shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with Articles 1 through 14 and Article
22 of the Patent Law Treaty, done at Geneva on 1 June 2000.
Article 20.27
Sui generis protection for pharmaceuticals
1.

For the purposes of this Article:
basic patent means a patent which protects a product as such, a process to obtain a
product or an application of a product, and which has been designated by the holder
of a patent that may serve as a basic patent, as the basic patent for the purpose of the
granting of sui generis protection; and
product means the active ingredient or combination of active ingredients of a
pharmaceutical product.

2.

3.

4.

Each Party shall provide a period of sui generis protection in respect of a product that
is protected by a basic patent in force at the request of the holder of the patent or his
successor in title, provided the following conditions have been met:
(a)

an authorisation has been granted to place the product on the market of that
Party as a pharmaceutical product (referred to as “marketing authorisation” in
this Article);

(b)

the product has not already been the subject of a period of sui generis
protection; and

(c)

the marketing authorisation referred to in sub-paragraph (a) is the first
authorisation to place the product on the market of that Party as a
pharmaceutical product.

Each Party may:
(a)

provide a period of sui generis protection only if the first application for the
marketing authorisation is submitted within a reasonable time limit prescribed
by that Party; and

(b)

prescribe a time limit of no less than 60 days from the date on which the first
marketing authorisation was granted for the submission of the request for the
period of sui generis protection. However, where the first marketing
authorisation is granted before the patent is granted, each Party will provide a
period of at least 60 days from the grant of the patent during which the request
for a period of protection under this Article may be submitted.

In the case where a product is protected by one basic patent, the period of sui generis
protection shall take effect at the end of the lawful term of that patent.
In the case where a product is protected by more than one patent that may serve as a
basic patent, a Party may provide for only a single period of sui generis protection,
which takes effect at the end of the lawful term of the basic patent,
(a)

in the case where all the patents that may serve as a basic patent are held by the
same person, selected by the person requesting the period of sui generis
protection; and

161

(b)

in the case where the patents that may serve as a basic patent are not held by
the same person and this gives rise to conflicting requests for the sui generis
protection, selected by agreement between the patent holders.

5.

Each Party shall provide that the period of sui generis protection be for a period
equal to the period which elapsed between the date on which the application for the
basic patent was filed and the date of the first marketing authorisation, reduced by a
period of five years.

6.

Notwithstanding paragraph 5 and without prejudice to a possible extension of the
period of sui generis protection by a Party as an incentive or a reward for research in
certain target populations, such as children, the duration of the sui generis protection
may not exceed a period of two to five years, to be established by each Party.

7.

Each Party may provide that the period of sui generis protection shall lapse:
(a)

if the sui generis protection is surrendered by the beneficiary; or

(b)

if any prescribed administrative fees are not paid.

Each Party may reduce the period of sui generis protection commensurate with any
unjustified delays resulting from the inactions of the applicant after applying for the
market authorisation, when the holder of the basic patent is the applicant for market
authorisation or an entity related to it.
8.

Within the limits of the protection conferred by the basic patent, the sui generis
protection shall extend only to the pharmaceutical product covered by the marketing
authorisation and for any use of that product as a pharmaceutical product that has
been authorised before the expiry of the sui generis protection. Subject to the
preceding sentence, the sui generis protection shall confer the same rights as
conferred by the patent and shall be subject to the same limitations and obligations.

9.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 8, each Party may also limit the scope of the
protection by providing exceptions for the making, using, offering for sale, selling or
importing of products for the purpose of export during the period of protection.

10.

Each Party may revoke the sui generis protection on grounds relating to invalidity of
the basic patent, including if that patent has lapsed before its lawful term expires or is
revoked or limited to the extent that the product for which the protection was granted
would no longer be protected by the claims of the basic patent, or on grounds relating
to the withdrawal of the marketing authorisation or authorisations for the respective
market, or if the protection was granted contrary to the provisions of paragraph 2.
Article 20.28
Patent linkage mechanisms relating to pharmaceutical products

If a Party relies on “patent linkage” mechanisms whereby the granting of marketing
authorisations (or notices of compliance or similar concepts) for generic pharmaceutical
products is linked to the existence of patent protection, it shall ensure that all litigants are
afforded equivalent and effective rights of appeal.
Sub-section F
Data Protection

162

Article 20.29
Protection of undisclosed data related to pharmaceutical products
1.

If a Party requires, as a condition for authorising the marketing of pharmaceutical
products that utilise new chemical entities28 (referred to as “authorisation” in this
Article) the submission of undisclosed test or other data necessary to determine
whether the use of those products is safe and effective, the Party shall protect such
data against disclosure, if the origination of such data involves considerable effort,
except where the disclosure is necessary to protect the public or unless steps are
taken to ensure that the data are protected against unfair commercial use.

2.

Each Party shall provide that for data subject to paragraph 1 that are submitted to the
Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement:
(a)

no person other than the person who submitted them may, without the latter’s
permission, rely on such data in support of an application for an authorisation
during a period of not less than six years from the date on which the Party
granted authorisation to the person that produced the data for authorisation; and

(b)

a Party shall not grant an authorisation to any person who relies on such data
during a period of not less than eight years from the date on which the Party
granted the authorisation to the person that produced the data for the
authorisation, unless the person that produced these data provides permission.

Subject to this paragraph, there shall be no limitation on either Party to implement
abbreviated authorisation procedures for such products on the basis of
bioequivalence and bioavailability studies.
Article 20.30
Protection of data related to plant protection products
1.

Each Party shall determine safety and efficacy requirements before authorising the
placing on the market of a plant protection product (referred to as “authorisation” in
this Article).

2.

Each Party shall provide a limited period of data protection for a test or study report
submitted for the first time to obtain an authorisation. During such period, each Party
shall provide that the test or study report will not be used for the benefit of any other
person aiming to obtain an authorisation, except when the explicit consent of the first
authorisation holder is proved.

3.

The test or study report should be necessary for the authorisation or for an
amendment of an authorisation in order to allow the use on other crops.

4.

In each Party, the period of data protection shall be at least ten years starting at the
date of the first authorisation in that Party with respect to the test or study report
supporting the authorisation of a new active ingredient and data supporting the
concurrent registration of the end-use product containing the active ingredient. The

28

For greater certainty, with respect to data protection, a “chemical entity” in Canada includes a biologic
or radiopharmaceutical which is regulated as a new drug under the Food and Drug Regulations of
Canada.

163

duration of protection may be extended in order to encourage the authorisation of
low-risk plant protection products and minor uses.
5.

Each Party may also establish data protection requirements or financial
compensation requirements for the test or study report supporting the amendment or
renewal of an authorisation.

6.

Each Party shall establish rules to avoid duplicative testing on vertebrate animals.
Any applicant intending to perform tests and studies involving vertebrate animals
should be encouraged to take the necessary measures to verify that those tests and
studies have not already been performed or initiated.

7.

Each Party should encourage each new applicant and each holder of the relevant
authorisations to make every effort to ensure that they share tests and studies
involving vertebrate animals. The costs of sharing such test and study reports shall be
determined in a fair, transparent and non-discriminatory way. An applicant is only
required to share in the costs of information that the applicant is required to submit to
meet the authorisation requirements.

8.

The holder or holders of the relevant authorisation shall have a right to be
compensated for a fair share of the costs incurred by them in respect of the test or
study report that supported such authorisation by an applicant relying on such test
and study reports to obtain an authorisation for a new plant protection product. Each
Party may direct the parties involved to resolve any issue by binding arbitration
administered under its law.
Sub-section G
Plant Varieties
Article 20.31
Plant varieties

Each Party shall co-operate to promote and reinforce the protection of plant varieties on the
basis of the 1991 Act of the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants, done at Paris on 2 December 1961.
SECTION C
Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights
Article 20.32
General obligations
1.

Each Party shall ensure that procedures for the enforcement of intellectual property
rights are fair and equitable, and are not unnecessarily complicated or costly, nor
entail unreasonable time-limits or unwarranted delays. These procedures shall be
applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to
provide for safeguards against their abuse.

164

2.

In implementing the provisions of this Section, each Party shall take into account the
need for proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement, the interests of
third parties, and the applicable measures, remedies and penalties.

3.

Articles 20.33 through 20.42 relate to civil enforcement.

4.

For the purposes of Articles 20.33 through 20.42, unless otherwise provided,
intellectual property rights means all categories of intellectual property that are the
subject of Sections 1 through 7 of Part II of the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 20.33

Entitled applicants
Each Party shall recognise as persons entitled to seek application of the procedures and
remedies referred to in Articles 20.34 through 20.42:
(a)

the holders of intellectual property rights in accordance with the provisions of its
law;

(b)

all other persons authorised to use those rights, if those persons are entitled to seek
relief in accordance with its law;

(c)

intellectual property collective rights management bodies that are regularly
recognised as having a right to represent holders of intellectual property rights, if
those bodies are entitled to seek relief in accordance with its law; and

(d)

professional defence bodies that are regularly recognised as having a right to
represent holders of intellectual property rights, if those bodies are entitled to seek
relief in accordance with its law.
Article 20.34

Evidence
Each Party shall ensure that, in the case of an alleged infringement of an intellectual property
right committed on a commercial scale, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to
order, if appropriate and following an application, the production of relevant information, as
provided for in its law, including banking, financial or commercial documents under the
control of the opposing party, subject to the protection of confidential information.
Article 20.35
Measures for preserving evidence
1.

Each Party shall ensure that, even before the commencement of proceedings on the
merits of the case, the judicial authorities may, on application by an entity that has
presented reasonably available evidence to support its claims that its intellectual
property right has been infringed or is about to be infringed, order prompt and
effective provisional measures to preserve relevant evidence in respect of the alleged
infringement, subject to the protection of confidential information.

2.

Each Party may provide that the measures referred to in paragraph 1 include the
detailed description, with or without the taking of samples, or the physical seizure of
the alleged infringing goods, and, in appropriate cases, the materials and implements
165

used in the production or distribution of these goods and the documents relating
thereto. The judicial authorities shall have the authority to take those measures, if
necessary without the other party being heard, in particular where any delay is likely
to cause irreparable harm to the right holder or where there is a demonstrable risk of
evidence being destroyed.
Article 20.36
Right of information
Without prejudice to its law governing privilege, the protection of confidentiality of
information sources or the processing of personal data, each Party shall provide that, in civil
judicial proceedings concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights, its judicial
authorities shall have the authority, upon a justified request of the right holder, to order the
infringer or the alleged infringer, to provide to the right holder or to the judicial authorities, at
least for the purpose of collecting evidence, relevant information as provided for in its
applicable laws and regulations that the infringer or alleged infringer possesses or controls.
This information may include information regarding any person involved in any aspect of the
infringement or alleged infringement and regarding the means of production or the channels
of distribution of the infringing or allegedly infringing goods or services, including the
identification of third persons alleged to be involved in the production and distribution of
those goods or services and of their channels of distribution.
Article 20.37
Provisional and precautionary measures
1.

Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order
prompt and effective provisional and precautionary measures, including an
interlocutory injunction, against a party, or where appropriate, against a third party
over whom the relevant judicial authority exercises jurisdiction, to prevent an
infringement of an intellectual property right from occurring, and in particular, to
prevent infringing goods from entering into the channels of commerce.

2.

Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the authority to order the
seizure or other taking into custody of the goods suspected of infringing an
intellectual property right so as to prevent their entry into or movement within the
channels of commerce.

3.

Each Party shall provide that, in the case of an alleged infringement of an intellectual
property right committed on a commercial scale, the judicial authorities may order,
in accordance with its law, the precautionary seizure of property of the alleged
infringer, including the blocking of its bank accounts and other assets. To that end,
the judicial authorities may order the communication of relevant bank, financial or
commercial documents, or access to other relevant information, as appropriate.
Article 20.38
Other remedies

1.

Each Party shall ensure that the judicial authorities may order, at the request of the
applicant and without prejudice to any damages due to the right holder by reason of
166

the infringement, and without compensation of any sort, the definitive removal from
the channels of commerce, or the destruction, of goods that they have found to be
infringing an intellectual property right. Each Party shall ensure that the judicial
authorities may order, if appropriate, destruction of materials and implements
predominantly used in the creation or manufacture of those goods. In considering a
request for such remedies, the need for proportionality between the seriousness of the
infringement and the remedies ordered, as well as the interests of third parties, shall
be taken into account.
2.

Each Party shall ensure that the judicial authorities have the authority to order that
the remedies referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out at the expense of the
infringer, unless particular reasons are invoked for not doing so.
Article 20.39
Injunctions

1.

Each Party shall provide that, in civil judicial proceedings concerning the
enforcement of intellectual property rights, its judicial authorities have the authority
to issue an order against a party to desist from an infringement, and among other
things, an order to that party, or, where appropriate, to a third party over whom the
relevant judicial authority exercises jurisdiction, to prevent infringing goods from
entering into the channels of commerce.

2.

Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section, a Party may limit the remedies
available against use by government, or by third parties authorised by government,
without the use of authorisation of the right holders to the payment of remuneration
provided that the Party complies with the provisions of Part II of the TRIPS
Agreement specifically addressing such use. In other cases, the remedies under this
Section shall apply or, where these remedies are inconsistent with a Party’s law,
declaratory judgments and adequate compensation shall be available.
Article 20.40
Damages

1.

Each Party shall provide that:
(a)

(b)

in civil judicial proceedings, its judicial authorities have the authority to order
the infringer who knowingly or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged in
infringing activity of intellectual property rights to pay the right holder:
(i)

damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has
suffered as a result of the infringement; or

(ii)

the profits of the infringer that are attributable to the infringement, which
may be presumed to be the amount of damages referred to in paragraph
(i); and

in determining the amount of damages for infringements of intellectual
property rights, its judicial authorities may consider, among other things, any
legitimate measure of value that may be submitted by the right holder,
including lost profits.

167

2.

As an alternative to paragraph 1, a Party’s law may provide for the payment of
remuneration, such as a royalty or fee, to compensate a right holder for the
unauthorised use of the right holder’s intellectual property.
Article 20.41
Legal costs

Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities, where appropriate, have the authority to
order, at the conclusion of civil judicial proceedings concerning the enforcement of
intellectual property rights, that the prevailing party be awarded payment by the losing party
of legal costs and other expenses, as provided for under that Party’s law.
Article 20.42
Presumption of authorship or ownership
1.

For the purposes of civil proceedings involving copyright or related rights, it is
sufficient for the name of an author of a literary or artistic work to appear on the
work in the usual manner in order for that author to be regarded as such, and
consequently to be entitled to institute infringement proceedings, unless there is
proof to the contrary. Proof to the contrary may include registration.

2.

Paragraph 1 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the holders of related rights with regard
to the protected subject matter of such rights.
SECTION D
Border Measures
Article 20.43
Scope of border measures

1.

For the purposes of this Section:
counterfeit geographical indication goods means any goods under Article 20.17
falling within one of the product classes listed in Annex 20-C, including packaging,
bearing without authorisation, a geographical indication which is identical to the
geographical indication validly registered or otherwise protected in respect of such
goods and which infringes the rights of the owner or right holder of the geographical
indication in question under the law of the Party in which the border measure
procedures are applied;
counterfeit trademark goods means any goods, including packaging, bearing,
without authorisation, a trademark which is identical to the trademark validly
registered in respect of such goods, or which cannot be distinguished in its essential
aspects from such a trademark, and which infringes the rights of the owner of the
trademark in question under the law of the Party in which the border measures
procedures are applied;
export shipments means shipments of goods which are to be taken from the territory
of a Party to a place outside that territory, excluding shipments in customs transit and
transhipments;
168

import shipments means shipments of goods brought into the territory of a Party
from a place outside that territory, while those goods remain under customs control,
including goods brought into the territory to a free zone or customs warehouse, but
excludes shipments in customs transit and transhipments;
pirated copyright goods means any goods which are copies made without the
consent of the right holder or person duly authorised by the right holder in the
country of production and which are made directly or indirectly from an article
where the making of that copy would have constituted an infringement of a copyright
or a related right under the law of the Party in which the border measure procedures
are applied;
shipments in customs transit means shipments of goods that enter the territory of a
Party from a place outside that territory and are authorised by customs authorities for
transport under continuous customs control from an office of entry to an office of
exit, for the purpose of exiting the territory. Shipments in customs transit that are
subsequently approved for removal from customs control without exiting the
territory are considered to be import shipments; and
transhipments means shipments of goods that are transferred under customs control
from the importing means of transport to the exporting means of transport within the
area of one customs office which is the office of both importation and exportation.
2.

The references to the infringement of intellectual property rights in this Section shall
be interpreted as referring to instances of counterfeit trademark goods, pirated
copyright goods or counterfeit geographical indication goods.

3.

It is the understanding of the Parties that there shall be no obligation to apply the
procedures set forth in this Section to goods put on the market in another country by
or with the consent of the right holder.

4.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures with respect to import and export
shipments under which a right holder may request its competent authorities to
suspend the release of, or detain, goods suspected of infringing an intellectual
property right.

5.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures with respect to import and export
shipments under which its competent authorities may act on their own initiative to
temporarily suspend the release of, or detain, goods suspected of infringing an
intellectual property right, in order to provide an opportunity to right holders to
formally request assistance under paragraph 4.

6.

Each Party may enter into an arrangement with one or more third countries to
establish common security customs clearance procedures. Goods cleared pursuant to
the terms of the common customs procedures of such an arrangement shall be
deemed to be in compliance with paragraphs 4 and 5, provided the Party concerned
retains the legal authority to comply with these paragraphs.

7.

Each Party may adopt or maintain the procedures referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5
with respect to transhipments and shipments in customs transit.

8.

Each Party may exclude from the application of this Article small quantities of goods
of a non-commercial nature contained in travellers’ personal luggage or small
quantities of goods of a non-commercial nature sent in small consignments.
169

Article 20.44
Application by the right holder
1.

Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities require a right holder who
requests the procedures described in Article 20.43 to provide adequate evidence to
satisfy the competent authorities that, under the law of the Party providing the
procedures, there is prima facie an infringement of the right holder's intellectual
property right, and to supply sufficient information that may reasonably be expected
to be within the right holder's knowledge to make the suspect goods reasonably
recognisable by the competent authorities. The requirement to provide sufficient
information shall not unreasonably deter recourse to the procedures described in
Article 20.43.

2.

Each Party shall provide for applications to suspend the release of, or to detain,
goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right listed in Article 20.43,
under customs control in its territory. The requirement to provide for such
applications is subject to the obligations to provide procedures referred to in Articles
20.43.4 and 20.43.5. The competent authorities may provide for such applications to
apply to multiple shipments. Each Party may provide that, at the request of the right
holder, the application to suspend the release of, or to detain, suspect goods may
apply to selected points of entry and exit under customs control.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities inform the applicant within a
reasonable period whether they have accepted the application. Where its competent
authorities have accepted the application, they shall also inform the applicant of the
period of validity of the application.

4.

Each Party may provide that, where the applicant has abused the procedures
described in Article 20.43, or where there is due cause, its competent authorities have
the authority to deny, suspend, or void an application.
Article 20.45
Provision of information from the right holder

Each Party shall permit its competent authorities to request a right holder to supply relevant
information that may reasonably be expected to be within the right holder's knowledge to
assist the competent authorities in taking the border measures referred to in this Section. Each
Party may also allow a right holder to supply such information to its competent authorities.
Article 20.46
Security or equivalent assurance
1.

Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to require a
right holder who requests the procedures described in Article 20.43 to provide
reasonable security or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the
competent authorities and to prevent abuse. Each Party shall provide that such
security or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to these
procedures.

170

2.

Each Party may provide that such security may be in the form of a bond conditioned
to hold the defendant harmless from any loss or damage resulting from any
suspension of the release of, or detention of, the goods in the event the competent
authorities determine that the goods are not infringing. A Party may, only in
exceptional circumstances or pursuant to a judicial order, permit the defendant to
obtain possession of suspect goods by posting a bond or other security.
Article 20.47
Determination as to infringement

Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures by which its competent authorities may
determine, within a reasonable period after the initiation of the procedures described in
Article 20.43, whether the suspect goods infringe an intellectual property right.
Article 20.48
Remedies
1.

Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the authority to order the
destruction of goods following a determination referred to in Article 20.47 that the
goods are infringing. In cases where such goods are not destroyed, each Party shall
ensure that, except in exceptional circumstances, such goods are disposed of outside
the channels of commerce, in such a manner as to avoid any harm to the right holder.

2.

In respect of counterfeit trademark goods, the simple removal of the trademark
unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than in exceptional cases, to permit
release of the goods into the channels of commerce.

3.

Each Party may provide that its competent authorities have the authority to impose
administrative penalties following a determination referred to in Article 20.47 that
the goods are infringing.
Article 20.49
Specific cooperation in the area of border measures

1.

Each Party agrees to cooperate with the other Party with a view to eliminating
international trade in goods infringing intellectual property rights. For this purpose,
each Party shall establish contact points in its administration and be ready to
exchange information on trade in infringing goods. Each Party shall, in particular,
promote the exchange of information and cooperation between its customs
authorities and those of the other Party with regard to trade in goods infringing
intellectual property rights.

2.

The cooperation referred to in paragraph 1 may include exchanges of information
regarding mechanisms for receiving information from rights holders, best practices,
and experiences with risk management strategies, as well as information to aid in the
identification of shipments suspected of containing infringing goods.

3.

The cooperation under this Section shall be conducted consistent with relevant
international agreements that are binding on both Parties. The Joint Customs
Cooperation Committee referred to in Article 6.14 (Joint Customs Cooperation
171

Committee) will set the priorities and provide for the adequate procedures for
cooperation under this Section between the competent authorities of the Parties.
SECTION E
Co-operation
Article 20.50
Co-operation
1.

2.

Each Party agrees to co-operate with the other Party with a view to supporting the
implementation of the commitments and obligations undertaken under this Chapter.
Areas of co-operation include exchanges of information or experience on the
following:
(a)

the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights, including
geographical indications; and

(b)

the establishment of arrangements between their respective collecting societies.

Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party agrees to establish and maintain an effective
dialogue on intellectual property issues to address topics relevant to the protection
and enforcement of intellectual property rights covered by this Chapter, and any
other relevant issue.

172

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
REGULATORY COOPERATION
Article 21.1
Scope
This Chapter applies to the development, review and methodological aspects of regulatory
measures of the Parties’ regulatory authorities that are covered by, among others, the TBT
Agreement, the SPS Agreement, the GATT 1994, the GATS, and Chapters Four (Technical
Barriers to Trade), Five (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), Nine (Cross-Border Trade in
Services), Twenty-Two (Trade and Sustainable Development), Twenty-Three (Trade and
Labour) and Twenty-Four (Trade and Environment).
Article 21.2
Principles
1.

The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations with respect to regulatory measures
under the TBT Agreement, the SPS Agreement, the GATT 1994 and the GATS.

2.

The Parties are committed to ensure high levels of protection for human, animal and
plant life or health, and the environment in accordance with the TBT Agreement, the
SPS Agreement, the GATT 1994, the GATS, and this Agreement.

3.

The Parties recognise the value of regulatory cooperation with their relevant trading
partners both bilaterally and multilaterally. The Parties will, whenever practicable
and mutually beneficial, approach regulatory cooperation in a way that is open to
participation by other international trading partners.

4.

Without limiting the ability of each Party to carry out its regulatory, legislative and
policy activities, the Parties are committed to further develop regulatory cooperation
in light of their mutual interest in order to:
(a)

prevent and eliminate unnecessary barriers to trade and investment;

(b)

enhance the climate for competitiveness and innovation, including by pursuing
regulatory compatibility, recognition of equivalence, and convergence; and

(c)

promote transparent, efficient and effective regulatory processes that support
public policy objectives and fulfil the mandates of regulatory bodies, including
through the promotion of information exchange and enhanced use of best
practices.

5.

This Chapter replaces the Framework on Regulatory Co-operation and Transparency
between the Government of Canada and the European Commission, done at Brussels
on 21 December 2004, and governs the activities previously undertaken in the
context of that Framework.

6.

The Parties may undertake regulatory cooperation activities on a voluntary basis. For
greater certainty, a Party is not required to enter into any particular regulatory
cooperation activity, and may refuse to cooperate or may withdraw from cooperation.
However, if a Party refuses to initiate regulatory cooperation or withdraws from
173

cooperation, it should be prepared to explain the reasons for its decision to the other
Party.
Article 21.3
Objectives of regulatory cooperation
The objectives of regulatory cooperation include to:
(a)

(b)

contribute to the protection of human life, health or safety, animal or plant life or
health and the environment by:
(i)

leveraging international resources in areas such as research, pre-market review
and risk analysis to address important regulatory issues of local, national and
international concern; and

(ii)

contributing to the base of information used by regulatory departments to
identify, assess and manage risks;

build trust, deepen mutual understanding of regulatory governance and obtain from
each other the benefit of expertise and perspectives in order to:
(i)

improve the planning and development of regulatory proposals;

(ii)

promote transparency and predictability in the development and establishment
of regulations;

(iii) enhance the efficacy of regulations;
(iv) identify alternative instruments;
(v)

recognise the associated impacts of regulations;

(vi) avoid unnecessary regulatory differences; and
(vii) improve regulatory implementation and compliance;
(c)

facilitate bilateral trade and investment in a way that:
(i)

builds on existing cooperative arrangements;

(ii)

reduces unnecessary differences in regulation; and

(iii) identifies new ways of working for cooperation in specific sectors; or
(d)

contribute to the improvement of competitiveness and efficiency of industry in a way
that:
(i)

minimises administrative costs whenever possible;

(ii)

reduces duplicative regulatory requirements and consequential compliance
costs whenever possible; and

(iii) pursues compatible regulatory approaches including, if possible and
appropriate, through:
(A) the application of regulatory approaches which are technology-neutral;
and
(B)

the recognition of equivalence or the promotion of convergence.

174

Article 21.4
Regulatory cooperation activities
The Parties endeavour to fulfil the objectives set out in Article 21.3 by undertaking regulatory
cooperation activities that may include:
(a)

engaging in ongoing bilateral discussions on regulatory governance, including to:
(i)

discuss regulatory reform and its effects on the Parties’ relationship;

(ii)

identify lessons learned;

(iii) explore, if appropriate, alternative approaches to regulation; and
(iv) exchange experiences with regulatory tools and instruments, including
regulatory impact assessments, risk assessment and compliance and
enforcement strategies;
(b)

consulting with each other, as appropriate, and exchanging information throughout
the regulatory development process. This consultation and exchange should begin as
early as possible in that process;

(c)

sharing non-public information to the extent that this information may be made
available to foreign governments in accordance with the applicable rules of the Party
providing the information;

(d)

sharing proposed technical or sanitary and phytosanitary regulations that may have
an impact on trade with the other Party at the earliest stage possible so that comments
and proposals for amendments may be taken into account;

(e)

providing, upon request by the other Party, a copy of the proposed regulation, subject
to applicable privacy law, and allow sufficient time for interested parties to provide
comments in writing;

(f)

exchanging information about contemplated regulatory actions, measures or
amendments under consideration, at the earliest stage possible, in order to:

(g)

(i)

understand the rationale behind a Party’s regulatory choices, including the
instrument choice, and examine the possibilities for greater convergence
between the Parties on how to state the objectives of regulations and how to
define their scope. The Parties should also address the interface between
regulations, standards and conformity assessment in this context; and

(ii)

compare methods and assumptions used to analyse regulatory proposals,
including, when appropriate, an analysis of technical or economic practicability
and the benefits in relation to the objective pursued of any major alternative
regulatory requirements or approaches considered. This information exchange
may also include compliance strategies and impact assessments, including a
comparison of the potential cost-effectiveness of the regulatory proposal to that
of major alternative regulatory requirements or approaches considered;

examining opportunities to minimise unnecessary divergences in regulations through
means such as:
(i)

conducting a concurrent or joint risk assessment and a regulatory impact
assessment if practicable and mutually beneficial;

175

(ii)

achieving a harmonised, equivalent or compatible solution; or

(iii) considering mutual recognition in specific cases;
(h)

cooperating on issues that concern the development, adoption, implementation and
maintenance of international standards, guides and recommendations;

(i)

examining the appropriateness and possibility of collecting the same or similar data
about the nature, extent and frequency of problems that may potentially give rise to
regulatory action when it would expedite making statistically significant judgments
about those problems;

(j)

periodically comparing data collection practices;

(k)

examining the appropriateness and the possibility of using the same or similar
assumptions and methodologies that the other Party uses to analyse data and assess
the underlying issues to be addressed through regulation in order to:
(i)

reduce differences in identifying issues; and

(ii)

promote similarity of results;

(l)

periodically comparing analytical assumptions and methodologies;

(m)

exchanging information on the administration, implementation and enforcement of
regulations, as well as on the means to obtain and measure compliance;

(n)

conducting cooperative research agendas in order to:
(i)

reduce duplicative research;

(ii)

generate more information at less cost;

(iii) gather the best data;
(iv) establish, when appropriate, a common scientific basis;
(v)

address the most pressing regulatory problems in a more consistent and
performance-oriented manner; and

(vi) minimise unnecessary differences in new regulatory proposals while more
effectively improving health, safety and environmental protection;
(o)

conducting post-implementation reviews of regulations or policies;

(p)

comparing methods and assumptions used in those post-implementation reviews;

(q)

when applicable, making available to each other summaries of the results of those
post-implementation reviews;

(r)

identifying the appropriate approach to reduce adverse effects of existing regulatory
differences on bilateral trade and investment in sectors identified by a Party,
including, when appropriate, through greater convergence, mutual recognition,
minimising the use of trade and investment distorting regulatory instruments, and the
use of international standards, including standards and guides for conformity
assessment; or

(s)

exchanging information, expertise and experience in the field of animal welfare in
order to promote collaboration on animal welfare between the Parties.

176

Article 21.5
Compatibility of regulatory measures
With a view to enhancing convergence and compatibility between the regulatory measures of
the Parties, each Party shall, when appropriate, consider the regulatory measures or initiatives
of the other Party on the same or related topics. A Party is not prevented from adopting
different regulatory measures or pursuing different initiatives for reasons including different
institutional or legislative approaches, circumstances, values or priorities that are particular to
that Party.
Article 21.6
The Regulatory Cooperation Forum
1.

A Regulatory Cooperation Forum (“RCF”) is established, pursuant to Article
26.2.1(h) (Specialised committees), to facilitate and promote regulatory cooperation
between the Parties in accordance with this Chapter.

2.

The RCF shall perform the following functions:
(a)

provide a forum to discuss regulatory policy issues of mutual interest that the
Parties have identified through, among others, consultations conducted in
accordance with Article 21.8;

(b)

assist individual regulators to identify potential partners for cooperation
activities and provide them with appropriate tools for that purpose, such as
model confidentiality agreements;

(c)

review regulatory initiatives, whether in progress or anticipated, that a Party
considers may provide potential for cooperation. The reviews, which will be
carried out in consultation with regulatory departments and agencies, should
support the implementation of this Chapter; and

(d)

encourage the development of bilateral cooperation activities in accordance
with Article 21.4 and, on the basis of information obtained from regulatory
departments and agencies, review the progress, achievements and best
practices of regulatory cooperation initiatives in specific sectors.

3.

The RCF shall be co-chaired by a senior representative of the Government of Canada
at the level of a Deputy Minister, equivalent or designate, and a senior representative
of the European Commission at the level of a Director General, equivalent or
designate, and shall comprise relevant officials of each Party. The Parties may by
mutual consent invite other interested parties to participate in the meetings of the
RCF.

4.

The RCF shall:
(a)

adopt its terms of reference, procedures and work-plan at its first meeting after
the entry into force of this Agreement;

(b)

meet within one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement and at
least annually thereafter, unless the Parties decide otherwise; and

(c)

report to the CETA Joint Committee on the implementation of this Chapter, as
appropriate.
177

Article 21.7
Further cooperation between the Parties
1.

Pursuant to Article 21.6.2(c) and to enable monitoring of forthcoming regulatory
projects and to identify opportunities for regulatory cooperation, the Parties shall
periodically exchange information of ongoing or planned regulatory projects in their
areas of responsibility. This information should include, if appropriate, new technical
regulations and amendments to existing technical regulations that are likely to be
proposed or adopted.

2.

The Parties may facilitate regulatory cooperation through the exchange of officials
pursuant to a specified arrangement.

3.

The Parties endeavour to cooperate and to share information on a voluntary basis in
the area of non-food product safety. This cooperation or exchange of information
may in particular relate to:
(a)

scientific, technical, and regulatory matters, to help improve non-food product
safety;

(b)

emerging issues of significant health and safety relevance that fall within the
scope of a Party’s authority;

(c)

standardisation related activities;

(d)

market surveillance and enforcement activities;

(e)

risk assessment methods and product testing; and

(f)

coordinated product recalls or other similar actions.

4.

The Parties may establish reciprocal exchange of information on the safety of
consumer products and on preventive, restrictive and corrective measures taken. In
particular, Canada may receive access to selected information from the European
Union RAPEX alert system, or its successor, with respect to consumer products as
referred to in Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
3 December 2001 on general product safety. The European Union may receive early
warning information on restrictive measures and product recalls from Canada’s
consumer product incident reporting system, known as RADAR, or its successor,
with respect to consumer products as defined in the Canada Consumer Product
Safety Act, S.C. 2010, c. 21 and cosmetics as defined in the Food and Drugs Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. F-27. This reciprocal exchange of information shall be done on the
basis of an arrangement setting out the measures referred to under paragraph 5.

5.

Before the Parties conduct the first exchange of information provided for under
paragraph 4, they shall ensure that the Committee on Trade in Goods endorse the
measures to implement these exchanges. The Parties shall ensure that these measures
specify the type of information to be exchanged, the modalities for the exchange and
the application of confidentiality and personal data protection rules.

6.

The Committee on Trade in Goods shall endorse the measures under paragraph 5
within one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement unless the Parties
decide to extend the date.

178

7.

The Parties may modify the measures referred to in paragraph 5. The Committee on
Trade in Goods shall endorse any modification to the measures.
Article 21.8
Consultations with private entities

In order to gain non-governmental perspectives on matters that relate to the implementation of
this Chapter, each Party or the Parties may consult, as appropriate, with stakeholders and
interested parties, including representatives from academia, think-tanks, non-governmental
organisations, businesses, consumer and other organisations. These consultations may be
conducted by any means the Party or Parties deem appropriate.
Article 21.9
Contact points
1.

2.

The contact points for communication between the Parties on matters arising under
this Chapter are:
(a)

in the case of Canada, the Technical Barriers and Regulations Division of the
Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development, or its successor; and

(b)

in the case of the European Union, the International Affairs Unit of the
Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs,
European Commission, or its successor.

Each contact point is responsible for consulting and coordinating with its respective
regulatory departments and agencies, as appropriate, on matters arising under this
Chapter.

179

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Article 22.1
Context and objectives
1.

The Parties recall the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992, the
Agenda 21 on Environment and Development of 1992, the Johannesburg Declaration
on Sustainable Development of 2002 and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development of 2002, the Ministerial Declaration of the
United Nations Economic and Social Council on Creating an environment at the
national and international levels conducive to generating full and productive
employment and decent work for all, and its impact on sustainable development of
2006, and the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalisation of 2008. The
Parties recognise that economic development, social development and environmental
protection are interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable
development, and reaffirm their commitment to promoting the development of
international trade in such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable
development, for the welfare of present and future generations.

2.

The Parties underline the benefit of considering trade-related labour and
environmental issues as part of a global approach to trade and sustainable
development. Accordingly, the Parties agree that the rights and obligations under
Chapters Twenty-Three (Trade and Labour) and Twenty-Four (Trade and
Environment) are to be considered in the context of this Agreement.

3.

In this regard, through the implementation of Chapters Twenty-Three (Trade and
Labour) and Twenty-Four (Trade and Environment), the Parties aim to:
(a)

promote sustainable development through the enhanced coordination and
integration of their respective labour, environmental and trade policies and
measures;

(b)

promote dialogue and cooperation between the Parties with a view to
developing their trade and economic relations in a manner that supports their
respective labour and environmental protection measures and standards, and to
upholding their environmental and labour protection objectives in a context of
trade relations that are free, open and transparent;

(c)

enhance enforcement of their respective labour and environmental law and
respect for labour and environmental international agreements;

(d)

promote the full use of instruments, such as impact assessment and stakeholder
consultations, in the regulation of trade, labour and environmental issues and
encourage businesses, civil society organisations and citizens to develop and
implement practices that contribute to the achievement of sustainable
development goals; and

180

(e)

promote public consultation and participation in the discussion of sustainable
development issues that arise under this Agreement and in the development of
relevant law and policies.
Article 22.2
Transparency

The Parties stress the importance of ensuring transparency as a necessary element to promote
public participation and making information public within the context of this Chapter, in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter Twenty-Seven (Transparency) as
well as Articles 23.6 (Public information and awareness) and 24.7 (Public information and
awareness).
Article 22.3
Cooperation and promotion of trade supporting sustainable development
1.

The Parties recognise the value of international cooperation to achieve the goal of
sustainable development and the integration at the international level of economic,
social and environmental development and protection initiatives, actions and
measures. Therefore, the Parties agree to dialogue and consult with each other with
regard to trade-related sustainable development issues of common interest.

2.

The Parties affirm that trade should promote sustainable development. Accordingly,
each Party shall strive to promote trade and economic flows and practices that
contribute to enhancing decent work and environmental protection, including by:

3.

(a)

encouraging the development and use of voluntary schemes relating to the
sustainable production of goods and services, such as eco-labelling and fair
trade schemes;

(b)

encouraging the development and use of voluntary best practices of corporate
social responsibility by enterprises, such as those in the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, to strengthen coherence between economic, social
and environmental objectives;

(c)

encouraging the integration of sustainability considerations in private and
public consumption decisions; and

(d)

promoting the development, the establishment, the maintenance or the
improvement of environmental performance goals and standards.

The Parties recognise the importance of addressing specific sustainable development
issues by assessing the potential economic, social and environmental impacts of
possible actions, taking account of the views of stakeholders. Therefore, each Party
commits to review, monitor and assess the impact of the implementation of this
Agreement on sustainable development in its territory in order to identify any need
for action that may arise in connection with this Agreement. The Parties may carry
out joint assessments. These assessments will be conducted in a manner that is
adapted to the practices and conditions of each Party, through the respective
participative processes of the Parties, as well as those processes set up under this
Agreement.

181

Article 22.4
Institutional mechanisms
1.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development, established under Article
26.2.1(g) (Specialised committees), shall be comprised of high level representatives
of the Parties responsible for matters covered by this Chapter and Chapters TwentyThree (Trade and Labour) and Twenty-Four (Trade and Environment). The
Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall oversee the implementation
of those Chapters, including cooperative activities and the review of the impact of
this Agreement on sustainable development, and address in an integrated manner any
matter of common interest to the Parties in relation to the interface between
economic development, social development and environmental protection. With
regard to Chapters Twenty-Three (Trade and Labour) and Twenty-Four (Trade and
Environment), the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development can also carry
out its duties through dedicated sessions comprising participants responsible for any
matter covered, respectively, under these Chapters.

2.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall meet within the first
year of the entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as often as the Parties
consider necessary. The contact points referred to in Articles 23.8 (Institutional
mechanisms) and 24.13 (Institutional mechanisms) are responsible for the
communication between the Parties regarding the scheduling and the organisation of
those meetings or dedicated sessions.

3.

Each regular meeting or dedicated session of the Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development includes a session with the public to discuss matters
relating to the implementation of the relevant Chapters, unless the Parties decide
otherwise.

4.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall promote transparency
and public participation. To this end:
(a)

any decision or report of the Committee on Trade and Sustainable
Development shall be made public, unless it decides otherwise;

(b)

the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall present updates on
any matter related to this Chapter, including its implementation, to the Civil
Society Forum referred to in Article 22.5. Any view or opinion of the Civil
Society Forum shall be presented to the Parties directly, or through the
consultative mechanisms referred to in Articles 23.8.3 (Institutional
mechanisms) and 24.13 (Institutional mechanisms). The Committee on Trade
and Sustainable Development shall report annually on the follow-up to those
communications;

(c)

the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall report annually on
any matter that it addresses pursuant to Article 24.7.3 (Public information and
awareness) or Article 23.8.4 (Institutional mechanisms).
Article 22.5
Civil Society Forum

182

1.

The Parties shall facilitate a joint Civil Society Forum composed of representatives
of civil society organisations established in their territories, including participants in
the consultative mechanisms referred to in Articles 23.8.3 (Institutional mechanisms)
and 24.13 (Institutional mechanisms), in order to conduct a dialogue on the
sustainable development aspects of this Agreement.

2.

The Civil Society Forum shall be convened once a year unless otherwise agreed by
the Parties. The Parties shall promote a balanced representation of relevant interests,
including independent representative employers, unions, labour and business
organisations, environmental groups, as well as other relevant civil society
organisations as appropriate. The Parties may also facilitate participation by virtual
means.

183

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
TRADE AND LABOUR
Article 23.1
Context and objectives
1.

The Parties recognise the value of international cooperation and agreements on
labour affairs as a response of the international community to economic, employment
and social challenges and opportunities resulting from globalisation. They recognise
the contribution that international trade could make to full and productive
employment and decent work for all and commit to consulting and cooperating as
appropriate on trade-related labour and employment issues of mutual interest.

2.

Affirming the value of greater policy coherence in decent work, encompassing core
labour standards, and high levels of labour protection, coupled with their effective
enforcement, the Parties recognise the beneficial role that those areas can have on
economic efficiency, innovation and productivity, including export performance. In
this context, they also recognise the importance of social dialogue on labour matters
among workers and employers, and their respective organisations, and governments,
and commit to the promotion of such dialogue.
Article 23.2
Right to regulate and levels of protection

Recognising the right of each Party to set its labour priorities, to establish its levels of labour
protection and to adopt or modify its laws and policies accordingly in a manner consistent
with its international labour commitments, including those in this Chapter, each Party shall
seek to ensure those laws and policies provide for and encourage high levels of labour
protection and shall strive to continue to improve such laws and policies with the goal of
providing high levels of labour protection.
Article 23.3
Multilateral labour standards and agreements
1.

Each Party shall ensure that its labour law and practices embody and provide
protection for the fundamental principles and rights at work which are listed below.
The Parties affirm their commitment to respect, promote and realise those principles
and rights in accordance with the obligations of the members of the International
Labour Organization (the “ILO”) and the commitments under the ILO Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up of 1998 adopted by
the International Labour Conference at its 86th Session:
(a)

freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective
bargaining;

(b)

the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;

(c)

the effective abolition of child labour; and

184

(d)
2.

the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.

Each Party shall ensure that its labour law and practices promote the following
objectives included in the ILO Decent Work Agenda, and in accordance with the
ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization of 2008 adopted by the
International Labour Conference at its 97th Session, and other international
commitments:
(a)

health and safety at work, including the prevention of occupational injury or
illness and compensation in cases of such injury or illness;

(b)

establishment of acceptable minimum employment standards for wage earners,
including those not covered by a collective agreement; and,

(c)

non-discrimination in respect of working conditions, including for migrant
workers.

3.

Pursuant to sub-paragraph 2(a), each Party shall ensure that its labour law and
practices embody and provide protection for working conditions that respect the
health and safety of workers, including by formulating policies that promote basic
principles aimed at preventing accidents and injuries that arise out of or in the course
of work, and that are aimed at developing a preventative safety and health culture
where the principle of prevention is accorded the highest priority. When preparing
and implementing measures aimed at health protection and safety at work, each Party
shall take into account existing relevant scientific and technical information and
related international standards, guidelines or recommendations, if the measures may
affect trade or investment between the Parties. The Parties acknowledge that in case
of existing or potential hazards or conditions that could reasonably be expected to
cause injury or illness to a person, a Party shall not use the lack of full scientific
certainty as a reason to postpone cost-effective protective measures.

4.

Each Party reaffirms its commitment to effectively implement in its law and
practices in its whole territory the fundamental ILO Conventions that Canada and the
Member States of the European Union have ratified respectively. The Parties shall
make continued and sustained efforts to ratify the fundamental ILO Conventions if
they have not yet done so. The Parties shall exchange information on their respective
situations and advances regarding the ratification of the fundamental as well as
priority and other ILO Conventions that are classified as up to date by the ILO.
Article 23.4
Upholding levels of protection

1.

The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by
weakening or reducing the levels of protection afforded in their labour law and
standards.

2.

A Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise
derogate from, its labour law and standards, to encourage trade or the establishment,
acquisition, expansion or retention of an investment in its territory.

3.

A Party shall not, through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, fail to
effectively enforce its labour law and standards to encourage trade or investment.

185

Article 23.5
Enforcement procedures, administrative proceedings and review of administrative
action
1.

2.

Pursuant to Article 23.4, each Party shall promote compliance with and shall
effectively enforce its labour law, including by:
(a)

maintaining a system of labour inspection in accordance with its international
commitments aimed at securing the enforcement of legal provisions relating to
working conditions and the protection of workers which are enforceable by
labour inspectors; and

(b)

ensuring that administrative and judicial proceedings are available to persons
with a legally recognised interest in a particular matter who maintain that a
right is infringed under its law, in order to permit effective action against
infringements of its labour law, including appropriate remedies for violations
of such law.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its law, ensure that the proceedings referred to
in sub-paragraph 1(b) are not unnecessarily complicated or prohibitively costly, do
not entail unreasonable time limits or unwarranted delays, provide injunctive relief, if
appropriate, and are fair and equitable, including by:
(a)

providing defendants with reasonable notice when a procedure is initiated,
including a description of the nature of the proceeding and the basis of the
claim;

(b)

providing the parties to the proceedings with a reasonable opportunity to
support or defend their respective positions, including by presenting
information or evidence, prior to a final decision;

(c)

providing that final decisions are made in writing and give reasons as
appropriate to the case and based on information or evidence in respect of
which the parties to the proceeding were offered the opportunity to be heard;
and

(d)

allowing the parties to administrative proceedings an opportunity for review
and, if warranted, correction of final administrative decisions within a
reasonable period of time by a tribunal established by law, with appropriate
guarantees of tribunal independence and impartiality.
Article 23.6
Public information and awareness

1.

In addition to its obligations under Article 27.1 (Publication), each Party shall
encourage public debate with and among non-state actors as regards the development
and definition of policies that may lead to the adoption of labour law and standards
by its public authorities.

2.

Each Party shall promote public awareness of its labour law and standards, as well as
enforcement and compliance procedures, including by ensuring the availability of
information and by taking steps to further the knowledge and understanding of
workers, employers and their representatives.
186

Article 23.7
Cooperative activities
1.

The Parties commit to cooperate to promote the objectives of this Chapter through
actions such as:
(a)

the exchange of information on best practices on issues of common interest and
on relevant events, activities, and initiatives;

(b)

cooperation in international fora that deal with issues relevant for trade and
labour, including in particular the WTO and the ILO;

(c)

the international promotion and the effective application of fundamental
principles and rights at work referred to in Article 23.3.1, and the ILO Decent
Work Agenda;

(d)

dialogue and information-sharing on the labour provisions in the context of
their respective trade agreements, and the implementation thereof;

(e)

the exploration of collaboration in initiatives regarding third parties; and

(f)

any other form of cooperation deemed appropriate.

2.

The Parties will consider any views provided by representatives of workers,
employers, and civil society organisations when identifying areas of cooperation, and
carrying out cooperative activities.

3.

The Parties may establish cooperative arrangements with the ILO and other
competent international or regional organisations to draw on their expertise and
resources to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
Article 23.8
Institutional mechanisms

1.

Each Party shall designate an office to serve as the contact point with the other Party
for the implementation of this Chapter, including with regard to:
(a)

cooperative programmes and activities in accordance with Article 23.7;

(b)

the receipt of submissions and communications under Article 23.9; and

(c)

information to be provided to the other Party, the Panels of Experts and the
public.

2.

Each Party shall inform the other Party, in writing, of the contact point referred to in
paragraph 1.

3.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development established under Article
26.2.1(g) (Specialised committees) shall, through its regular meetings or dedicated
sessions comprising participants responsible for matters covered under this Chapter:
(a)

oversee the implementation of this Chapter and review the progress achieved
under it, including its operation and effectiveness; and

(b)

discuss any other matter within the scope of this Chapter.

187

4.

Each Party shall convene a new or consult its domestic labour or sustainable
development advisory groups, to seek views and advice on issues relating to this
Chapter. Those groups shall comprise independent representative organisations of
civil society in a balanced representation of employers, unions, labour and business
organisations, as well as other relevant stakeholders as appropriate. They may submit
opinions and make recommendations on any matter related to this Chapter on their
own initiative.

5.

Each Party shall be open to receive and shall give due consideration to submissions
from the public on matters related to this Chapter, including communications on
implementation concerns. Each Party shall inform its respective domestic labour or
sustainable development advisory groups of those communications.

6.

The Parties shall take into account the activities of the ILO so as to promote greater
cooperation and coherence between the work of the Parties and the ILO.
Article 23.9
Consultations

1.

A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising
under this Chapter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other
Party. The Party shall present the matter clearly in its request, identify the questions
at issue and provide a brief summary of any claims under this Chapter. Consultations
must commence promptly after a Party delivers a request for consultations.

2.

During consultations, each Party shall provide the other Party with sufficient
information in its possession to allow a full examination of the matters raised, subject
to its law regarding confidential personal and commercial information.

3.

If relevant, and if both Parties consent, the Parties shall seek the information or views
of any person, organisation or body, including the ILO, that may contribute to the
examination of the matter that arises.

4.

If a Party considers that further discussion of the matter is required, that Party may
request that the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development be convened to
consider the matter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other
Party. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall convene
promptly and endeavour to resolve the matter. If appropriate, it shall seek the advice
of the Parties’ domestic labour or sustainable development advisory groups through
the consultative mechanisms referred to in Article 23.8.

5.

Each Party shall make publicly available any solution or decision on a matter
discussed under this Article.
Article 23.10
Panel of Experts

1.

For any matter that is not satisfactorily addressed through consultations under Article
23.9, a Party may, 90 days after the receipt of a request for consultations under
Article 23.9.1, request that a Panel of Experts be convened to examine that matter, by
delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party.

188

2.

Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Parties shall apply the Rules of
Procedure and Code of Conduct set out in Annexes 29-A and 29-B, unless the Parties
decide otherwise.

3.

The Panel of Experts is composed of three panellists.

4.

The Parties shall consult with a view to reaching an agreement on the composition of
the Panel of Experts within 10 working days of the receipt by the responding Party of
the request for the establishment of a Panel of Experts. Due attention shall be paid to
ensuring that proposed panellists meet the requirements set out in paragraph 7 and
have the expertise appropriate to the particular matter.

5.

If the Parties are unable to decide on the composition of the Panel of Experts within
the period of time specified in paragraph 4, the selection procedure set out in
paragraphs 3 through 7 of Article 29.7 (Composition of the arbitration panel) applies
in respect of the list established in paragraph 6.

6.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall, at its first meeting after
the entry into force of this Agreement, establish a list of at least nine individuals
chosen for their objectivity, reliability and sound judgment, who are willing and able
to serve as panellists. Each Party shall name at least three individuals to the list to
serve as panellists. The Parties shall also name at least three individuals who are not
nationals of either Party and who are willing and able to serve as chairperson of a
Panel of Experts. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall
ensure that the list is always maintained at this level.

7.

The experts proposed as panellists must have specialised knowledge or expertise in
labour law, other issues addressed in this Chapter, or in the resolution of disputes
arising under international agreements. They must be independent, serve in their
individual capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government
with regard to the matter in issue. They must not be affiliated with the government of
either Party, and must comply with the Code of Conduct referred to in paragraph 2.

8.

Unless the Parties decide otherwise, within five working days of the date of the
selection of the panellists, the terms of reference of the Panel of Experts are as
follows:
“to examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of Chapter Twenty-Three (Trade
and Labour), the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of the Panel
of Experts, and to deliver a report, in accordance with Article 23.10 (Panel of
Experts) of Chapter Twenty-Three (Trade and Labour), that makes recommendations
for the resolution of the matter.”

9.

In respect of matters related to multilateral agreements as set out in Article 23.3, the
Panel of Experts should seek information from the ILO, including any pertinent
available interpretative guidance, findings or decisions adopted by the ILO.29

10.

The Panel may request and receive written submissions or any other information
from persons with relevant information or specialised knowledge.

29

The Parties shall apply this provision in accordance with rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration set out in Annex 29-A.

189

11.

The Panel of Experts shall issue to the Parties an interim report and a final report
setting out the findings of fact, its determinations on the matter including as to
whether the responding Party has conformed with its obligations under this Chapter
and the rationale behind any findings, determinations and recommendations that it
makes. The Panel of Experts shall deliver to the Parties the interim report within 120
days after the last panellist is selected, or as otherwise decided by the Parties. The
Parties may provide comments to the Panel of Experts on the interim report within
45 days of its delivery. After considering these comments, the Panel of Experts may
reconsider its report or carry out any further examination that it considers
appropriate. The Panel of Experts shall deliver the final report to the Parties within
60 days of the submission of the interim report. Each Party shall make the final
report publicly available within 30 days of its delivery.

12.

If the final report of the Panel of Experts determines that a Party has not conformed
with its obligations under this Chapter, the Parties shall engage in discussions and
shall endeavour, within three months of the delivery of the final report, to identify
appropriate measures or, if appropriate, to decide upon a mutually satisfactory action
plan. In these discussions, the Parties shall take into account the final report. The
responding Party shall inform in a timely manner its labour or sustainable
development advisory groups and the requesting Party of its decision on any actions
or measures to be implemented. Furthermore, the requesting Party shall inform in a
timely manner its labour or sustainable development advisory groups and the
responding Party of any other action or measure it may decide to take, as a follow-up
to the final report, to encourage the resolution of the matter in a manner consistent
with this Agreement. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall
monitor the follow-up to the final report and the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts. The labour or sustainable development advisory groups of the Parties and
the Civil Society Forum may submit observations to the Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development in this regard.

13.

If the Parties reach a mutually agreed solution to the matter following the
establishment of a Panel of Experts, they shall notify the Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development and the Panel of Experts of that solution. Upon that
notification, the panel procedure shall be terminated.
Article 23.11
Dispute resolution

1.

For any dispute that arises under this Chapter, the Parties shall only have recourse to
the rules and procedures provided in this Chapter.

2.

The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of
a dispute. At any time, the Parties may have recourse to good offices, conciliation, or
mediation to resolve that dispute.

3.

The Parties understand that the obligations included under this Chapter are binding
and enforceable through the procedures for the resolution of disputes provided in
Article 23.10. Within this context, the Parties shall discuss, through the meetings of
the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development, the effectiveness of the
implementation of the Chapter, policy developments in each Party, developments in

190

international agreements, and views presented by stakeholders, as well as possible
reviews of the procedures for the resolution of disputes provided for in Article 23.10.
4.

In the case of disagreement under paragraph 3, a Party may request consultations
according to the procedures established in Article 23.9 in order to review the
provisions for the resolution of disputes provided for in Article 23.10, with a view to
reaching a mutually agreed solution to the matter.

5.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development may recommend to the
CETA Joint Committee modifications to relevant provisions of this Chapter, in
accordance with the amendment procedures established in Article 30.2
(Amendments).

191

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT
Article 24.1
Definition
For the purposes of this Chapter:
environmental law means a law, including a statutory or regulatory provision, or other
legally binding measure of a Party, the purpose of which is the protection of the environment,
including the prevention of a danger to human life or health from environmental impacts, such
as those that aim at:
(a)

the prevention, abatement or control of the release, discharge, or emission of
pollutants or environmental contaminants,

(b)

the management of chemicals and waste or the dissemination of information related
thereto, or

(c)

the conservation and protection of wild flora or fauna, including endangered species
and their habitats, as well as protected areas,

but does not include a measure of a Party solely related to worker health and safety, which is
subject to Chapter Twenty-Three (Trade and Labour), or a measure of a Party the purpose of
which is to manage the subsistence or aboriginal harvesting of natural resources.
Article 24.2
Context and objectives
The Parties recognise that the environment is a fundamental pillar of sustainable development
and recognise the contribution that trade could make to sustainable development. The Parties
stress that enhanced cooperation to protect and conserve the environment brings benefits that
will:
(a)

promote sustainable development;

(b)

strengthen the environmental governance of the Parties;

(c)

build upon international environmental agreements to which they are party; and

(d)

complement the objectives of this Agreement.
Article 24.3
Right to regulate and levels of protection

The Parties recognise the right of each Party to set its environmental priorities, to establish its
levels of environmental protection, and to adopt or modify its laws and policies accordingly
and in a manner consistent with the multilateral environmental agreements to which it is party
and with this Agreement. Each Party shall seek to ensure that those laws and policies provide
for and encourage high levels of environmental protection, and shall strive to continue to
improve such laws and policies and their underlying levels of protection.

192

Article 24.4
Multilateral environmental agreements
1.

The Parties recognise the value of international environmental governance and
agreements as a response of the international community to global or regional
environmental problems and stress the need to enhance the mutual supportiveness
between trade and environment policies, rules, and measures.

2.

Each Party reaffirms its commitment to effectively implement in its law and
practices, in its whole territory, the multilateral environmental agreements to which it
is party.

3.

The Parties commit to consult and cooperate as appropriate with respect to
environmental issues of mutual interest related to multilateral environmental
agreements, and in particular, trade-related issues. This commitment includes
exchanging information on:

4.

(a)

the implementation of multilateral environmental agreements, to which a Party
is party;

(b)

on-going negotiations of new multilateral environmental agreements; and

(c)

each Party’s respective views on becoming a party to additional multilateral
environmental agreements.

The Parties acknowledge their right to use Article 28.3 (General exceptions) in
relation to environmental measures, including those taken pursuant to multilateral
environmental agreements to which they are party.
Article 24.5
Upholding levels of protection

1.

The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by
weakening or reducing the levels of protection afforded in their environmental law.

2.

A Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise
derogate from, its environmental law, to encourage trade or the establishment,
acquisition, expansion or retention of an investment in its territory.

3.

A Party shall not, through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, fail to
effectively enforce its environmental law to encourage trade or investment.
Article 24.6
Access to remedies and procedural guarantees

1.

Pursuant to the obligations in Article 24.5:
(a)

each Party shall, in accordance with its law, ensure that its authorities
competent to enforce environmental law give due consideration to alleged
violations of environmental law brought to its attention by any interested
persons residing or established in its territory; and

(b)

each Party shall ensure that administrative or judicial proceedings are available
to persons with a legally recognised interest in a particular matter or who
193

maintain that a right is infringed under its law, in order to permit effective
action against infringements of its environmental law, including appropriate
remedies for violations of such law.
2.

Each Party shall, in accordance with its domestic law, ensure that the proceedings
referred to in sub-paragraph 1(b) are not unnecessarily complicated or prohibitively
costly, do not entail unreasonable time limits or unwarranted delays, provide
injunctive relief if appropriate, and are fair, equitable and transparent, including by:
(a)

providing defendants with reasonable notice when a proceeding is initiated,
including a description of the nature of the proceeding and the basis of the
claim;

(b)

providing the parties to the proceeding with a reasonable opportunity to
support or defend their respective positions, including by presenting
information or evidence, prior to a final decision;

(c)

providing that final decisions are made in writing and give reasons as
appropriate to the case and based on information or evidence in respect of
which the parties to the proceeding were offered the opportunity to be heard;
and

(d)

allowing the parties to administrative proceedings an opportunity for review
and, if warranted, correction of final administrative decisions within a
reasonable period of time by a tribunal established by law, with appropriate
guarantees of tribunal independence and impartiality.
Article 24.7
Public information and awareness

1.

In addition to Article 27.1 (Publication), each Party shall encourage public debate
with and among non-state actors as regards the development and definition of
policies that may lead to the adoption of environmental law by its public authorities.

2.

Each Party shall promote public awareness of its environmental law, as well as
enforcement and compliance procedures, by ensuring the availability of information
to stakeholders.

3.

Each Party shall be open to receive and shall give due consideration to submissions
from the public on matters related to this Chapter, including communications on
implementation concerns. Each Party shall inform its respective civil society
organisations of those communications through the consultative mechanisms referred
to in Article 24.13.5.
Article 24.8
Scientific and technical information

1.

When preparing and implementing measures aimed at environmental protection that
may affect trade or investment between the Parties, each Party shall take into account
relevant scientific and technical information and related international standards,
guidelines, or recommendations.

194

2.

The Parties acknowledge that where there are threats of serious or irreversible
damage, the lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for
postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
Article 24.9
Trade favouring environmental protection

1.

The Parties are resolved to make efforts to facilitate and promote trade and
investment in environmental goods and services, including through addressing the
reduction of non-tariff barriers related to these goods and services.

2.

The Parties shall, consistent with their international obligations, pay special attention
to facilitating the removal of obstacles to trade or investment in goods and services
of particular relevance for climate change mitigation and in particular trade or
investment in renewable energy goods and related services.
Article 24.10
Trade in forest products

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of the conservation and sustainable
management of forests for providing environmental functions and economic and
social opportunities for present and future generations, and of market access for
forest products harvested in accordance with the law of the country of harvest and
from sustainably managed forests.

2.

To this end, and in a manner consistent with their international obligations, the
Parties undertake to:

3.

(a)

encourage trade in forest products from sustainably managed forests and
harvested in accordance with the law of the country of harvest;

(b)

exchange information, and if appropriate, cooperate on initiatives to promote
sustainable forest management, including initiatives designed to combat illegal
logging and related trade;

(c)

promote the effective use of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, done at Washington on 3 March
1973, with regard to timber species considered at risk; and

(d)

cooperate, where appropriate, in international fora that deal with the
conservation and sustainable management of forests.

The Parties shall discuss the subjects referred to in paragraph 2, in the Committee on
Trade and Sustainable Development or in the Bilateral Dialogue on Forest Products
referred to in Chapter Twenty-Five (Bilateral Dialogues and Cooperation), in
accordance with their respective spheres of competence.
Article 24.11
Trade in fisheries and aquaculture products

1.

The Parties recognise the importance of the conservation and the sustainable and
responsible management of fisheries and aquaculture and their contribution to
195

providing environmental, economic and social opportunities for present and future
generations.
2.

To this end, and in a manner consistent with their international obligations, the
Parties undertake to:
(a)

adopt or maintain effective monitoring, control and surveillance measures,
such as observer schemes, vessel monitoring schemes, transhipment control,
inspections at sea, port state control, and associated sanctions, aimed at the
conservation of fish stocks and the prevention of overfishing;

(b)

adopt or maintain actions and cooperate to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated (“IUU”) fishing, including, where appropriate, the exchange of
information on IUU activities in their waters and the implementation of
policies and measures to exclude IUU products from trade flows and fish
farming operations;

(c)

cooperate with, and where appropriate in, regional fisheries management
organisations in which the Parties are either members, observers, or
cooperating non-contracting parties, with the aim of achieving good
governance, including by advocating for science-based decisions and for
compliance with those decisions in these organisations; and

(d)

promote the development of an environmentally responsible and economically
competitive aquaculture industry.
Article 24.12
Cooperation on environment issues

1.

The Parties recognise that enhanced cooperation is an important element to advance
the objectives of this Chapter, and commit to cooperate on trade-related
environmental issues of common interest, in areas such as:
(a)

the potential impact of this Agreement on the environment and ways to
enhance, prevent, or mitigate such impact, taking into account any impact
assessment carried out by the Parties;

(b)

activity in international fora dealing with issues relevant for both trade and
environmental policies, including in particular the WTO, the OECD, the
United Nations Environment Programme, and multilateral environmental
agreements;

(c)

the environmental dimension of corporate social responsibility and
accountability, including the implementation and follow-up of internationally
recognised guidelines;

(d)

the trade impact of environmental regulations and standards as well as the
environmental impact of trade and investment rules including on the
development of environmental regulations and policy;

(e)

trade-related aspects of the current and future international climate change
regime, as well as domestic climate policies and programmes relating to
mitigation and adaptation, including issues relating to carbon markets, ways to
address adverse effects of trade on climate, as well as means to promote energy
196

efficiency and the development and deployment of low-carbon and other
climate-friendly technologies;
(f)

trade and investment in environmental goods and services, including
environmental and green technologies and practices; renewable energy; energy
efficiency; and water use, conservation and treatment;

(g)

cooperation on trade-related aspects of the conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity;

(h)

promotion of life-cycle management of goods, including carbon accounting
and end-of-life management, extended producer-responsibility, recycling and
reduction of waste, and other best practices;

(i)

improved understanding of the effects of economic activity and market forces
on the environment; and

(j)

exchange of views on the relationship between multilateral environmental
agreements and international trade rules.

2.

Cooperation further to paragraph 1 shall take place through actions and instruments
that may include technical exchanges, exchanges of information and best practices,
research projects, studies, reports, conferences and workshops.

3.

The Parties will consider views or input from the public and interested stakeholders
for the definition and implementation of their cooperation activities, and they may
involve such stakeholders further in those activities, as appropriate.
Article 24.13
Institutional mechanisms

1.

Each Party shall designate an office to serve as contact point with the other Party for
the implementation of this Chapter, including with regard to:
(a)

cooperative programmes and activities in accordance with Article 24.12;

(b)

the receipt of submissions and communications under Article 24.7.3; and

(c)

information to be provided to the other Party, the Panel of Experts, and the
public.

2.

Each Party shall inform the other Party, in writing, of the contact point referred to in
paragraph 1.

3.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development established under Article
26.2.1(g) (Specialised committees) shall, through its regular meetings or dedicated
sessions comprising participants responsible for matters covered under this Chapter:
(a)

oversee the implementation of this Chapter and review the progress achieved
under it;

(b)

discuss matters of common interest; and

(c)

discuss any other matter within the scope of this Chapter as the Parties jointly
decide.

197

4.

The Parties shall take into account the activities of relevant multilateral
environmental organisations or bodies so as to promote greater cooperation and
coherence between the work of the Parties and these organisations or bodies.

5.

Each Party shall make use of existing, or establish new, consultative mechanisms,
such as domestic advisory groups, to seek views and advice on issues relating to this
Chapter. These consultative mechanisms shall comprise independent representative
organisations of civil society in a balanced representation of environmental groups,
business organisations, as well as other relevant stakeholders as appropriate. Through
such consultative mechanisms, stakeholders may submit opinions and make
recommendations on any matter related to this Chapter on their own initiative.
Article 24.14
Consultations

1.

A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising
under this Chapter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other
Party. The Party shall present the matter clearly in the request, identify the questions
at issue, and provide a brief summary of any claims under this Chapter.
Consultations must commence promptly after a Party delivers a request for
consultations.

2.

During consultations, each Party shall provide the other Party with sufficient
information in its possession to allow a full examination of the matters raised, subject
to its law regarding the protection of confidential or proprietary information.

3.

If relevant, and if both Parties consent, the Parties shall seek the information or views
of any person, organisation, or body, including the relevant international organisation
or body, that may contribute to the examination of the matter at issue.

4.

If a Party considers that further discussion of the matter is required, that Party may
request that the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development be convened to
consider the matter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other
Party. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall convene
promptly and endeavour to resolve the matter. If appropriate, it shall seek the advice
of the Parties’ civil society organisations through the consultative mechanisms
referred to in Article 24.13.5.

5.

Each Party shall make publicly available any solution or decision on a matter
discussed under this Article.
Article 24.15
Panel of Experts

1.

For any matter that is not satisfactorily addressed through consultations under Article
24.14, a Party may, 90 days after the receipt of the request for consultations under
Article 24.14.1, request that a Panel of Experts be convened to examine that matter,
by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party.

198

2.

Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Parties shall apply the Rules of
Procedure and Code of Conduct set out in Annexes 29-A and 29-B, unless the Parties
decide otherwise.

3.

The Panel of Experts is composed of three panellists.

4.

The Parties shall consult with a view to reaching an agreement on the composition of
the Panel of Experts within 10 working days of the receipt by the responding Party of
a request for the establishment of a Panel of Experts. Due attention shall be paid to
ensuring that proposed panellists meet the requirements set out in paragraph 7 and
have the expertise appropriate to the particular matter.

5.

If the Parties are unable to decide on the composition of the Panel of Experts within
the period of time specified in paragraph 4, the selection procedure set out in
paragraphs 3 through 7 of Article 29.7 (Composition of the arbitration panel) applies
in respect of the list established in paragraph 6.

6.

The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall, at its first meeting after
the entry into force of this Agreement, establish a list of at least nine individuals
chosen for their objectivity, reliability, and sound judgment, who are willing and able
to serve as panellists. Each Party shall name at least three individuals to the list to
serve as panellists. The Parties shall also name at least three individuals who are not
nationals of either Party and who are willing and able to serve as chairperson of a
Panel of Experts. The Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall
ensure that the list is always maintained at this level.

7.

The experts proposed as panellists must have specialised knowledge or expertise in
environmental law, issues addressed in this Chapter, or in the resolution of disputes
arising under international agreements. They must be independent, serve in their
individual capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government
with regard to the matter in issue. They must not be affiliated with the governments
of either Party, and must comply with the Code of Conduct referred to in paragraph
2.

8.

Unless the Parties otherwise decide, within five working days of the date of the
selection of the panellists, the terms of reference of the Panel of Experts are as
follows:
“to examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of Chapter Twenty-Four (Trade
and Environment), the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of the
Panel of Experts, and to deliver a report in accordance with Article 24.15 (Panel of
Experts) of Chapter Twenty-Four (Trade and Environment), that makes
recommendations for the resolution of the matter”

9.

In respect of matters related to multilateral environmental agreements as set out in
Article 24.4, the Panel of Experts should seek views and information from relevant
bodies established under these agreements, including any pertinent available
interpretative guidance, findings, or decisions adopted by those bodies.30

10.

The Panel of Experts shall issue to the Parties an interim report and a final report
setting out the findings of fact, its determinations on the matter, including as to

30

The Parties shall apply this provision in accordance with rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration set out in Annex 29-A.

199

whether the responding Party has conformed with its obligations under this Chapter
and the rationale behind any findings, determinations and recommendations that it
makes. The Panel of Experts shall deliver to the Parties the interim report within 120
days after the last panellist is selected, or as otherwise decided by the Parties. The
Parties may provide comments to the Panel of Experts on the interim report within
45 days of its delivery. After considering these comments, the Panel of Experts may
reconsider its report or carry out any further examination that it considers
appropriate. The Panel of Experts shall deliver the final report to the Parties within
60 days of the submission of the interim report. Each Party shall make the final
report publicly available within 30 days of its delivery.
11.

If the final report of the Panel of Experts determines that a Party has not conformed
with its obligations under this Chapter, the Parties shall engage in discussions and
shall endeavour, within three months of the delivery of the final report, to identify an
appropriate measure or, if appropriate, to decide upon a mutually satisfactory action
plan. In these discussions, the Parties shall take into account the final report. The
responding Party shall inform, in a timely manner, its civil society organisations,
through the consultative mechanisms referred to in Article 24.13.5, and the
requesting Party of its decision on any action or measure to be implemented. The
Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development shall monitor the follow-up to the
final report and the recommendations of the Panel of Experts. The civil society
organisations, through the consultative mechanisms referred to in Article 24.13.5,
and the Civil Society Forum may submit observations to the Committee on Trade
and Sustainable Development in this regard.

12.

If the Parties reach a mutually agreed solution to the matter following the
establishment of a Panel of Experts, they shall notify the Committee on Trade and
Sustainable Development and the Panel of Experts of that solution. Upon that
notification, the panel procedure shall be terminated.
Article 24.16
Dispute resolution

1.

For any dispute that arises under this Chapter, the Parties shall only have recourse to
the rules and procedures provided for in this Chapter.

2.

The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of
a dispute. At any time, the Parties may have recourse to good offices, conciliation, or
mediation to resolve that dispute.

200

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
BILATERAL DIALOGUES AND COOPERATION

Article 25.1
Objectives and principles
1.

Building upon their well-established partnership and shared values, the Parties agree
to facilitate cooperation on issues of common interest, including through:
(a)

strengthening bilateral cooperation on biotechnology through the Dialogue on
Biotech Market Access Issues;

(b)

fostering and facilitating bilateral dialogue and exchange of information on
issues related to trade in forest products through the Bilateral Dialogue on
Forest Products;

(c)

endeavour to establish and maintain effective cooperation on raw materials
issues through the Bilateral Dialogue on Raw Materials; and

(d)

encouraging enhanced cooperation on science, technology, research and
innovation issues.

2.

Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, bilateral dialogues shall take place
without undue delay at the request of either Party or of the CETA Joint Committee.
The dialogues shall be co-chaired by representatives of Canada and the European
Union. The meeting schedules and agendas shall be determined by agreement
between the co-chairs.

3.

The co-chairs of a bilateral dialogue shall inform the CETA Joint Committee of the
schedules and agendas of any bilateral dialogue sufficiently in advance of meetings.
The co-chairs of a bilateral dialogue shall report to the CETA Joint Committee on the
results and conclusions of a dialogue as appropriate or on request by the CETA Joint
Committee. The creation or existence of a dialogue shall not prevent either Party
from bringing any matter directly to the CETA Joint Committee.

4.

The CETA Joint Committee may decide to change or undertake the task assigned to
a dialogue or dissolve a dialogue.

5.

The Parties may engage in bilateral cooperation in other areas under this Agreement
on consent of the CETA Joint Committee.
Article 25.2
Dialogue on Biotech Market Access Issues

1.

The Parties agree that cooperation and information exchange on issues in connection
with biotechnology products are of mutual interest. Such cooperation and exchange
of information shall take place in the bilateral dialogue on agricultural biotech
market access issues of mutual interest which was established by the Mutually
Agreed Solution reached on 15 July 2009 between Canada and the European Union
following the WTO dispute European Communities – Measures Affecting the

201

Approval and Marketing of Biotech Products WT/DS292. The bilateral dialogue
covers any relevant issue of mutual interest to the Parties, including:

2.

(a)

biotechnology product approvals in the territory of the Parties as well as, where
appropriate, forthcoming applications for product approvals of commercial
interest to either side;

(b)

the commercial and economic outlook for future approvals of biotechnology
products;

(c)

any trade impact related to asynchronous approvals of biotechnology products
or the accidental release of unauthorised products, and any appropriate
measures in this respect;

(d)

any biotech-related measures that may affect trade between the Parties,
including measures of Member States of the European Union;

(e)

any new legislation in the field of biotechnology; and

(f)

best practices in the implementation of legislation on biotechnology.

The Parties also note the importance of the following shared objectives with respect
to cooperation in the field of biotechnology:
(a)

to exchange information on policy, regulatory and technical issues of common
interest related to biotechnology products, and, in particular, information on
their respective systems and processes for risk assessments for decisionmaking on the use of genetically modified organisms;

(b)

to promote efficient science-based approval processes for biotechnology
products;

(c)

to cooperate internationally on issues related to biotechnology, such as low
level presence of genetically modified organisms; and

(d)

to engage in regulatory cooperation to minimise adverse trade impacts of
regulatory practices related to biotechnology products.
Article 25.3
Bilateral Dialogue on Forest Products

1.

The Parties agree that bilateral dialogue, cooperation and exchange of information
and views on relevant laws, regulations, policies and issues of importance to the
production, trade, and consumption of forest products are of mutual interest. The
Parties agree to carry out this dialogue, cooperation and exchange in the Bilateral
Dialogue on Forest Products, including:
(a)

the development, adoption and implementation of relevant laws, regulations,
policies and standards, and testing, certification and accreditation requirements
and their potential impact on trade in forest products between the Parties;

(b)

initiatives of the Parties related to the sustainable management of forests and
forest governance;

(c)

mechanisms to assure the legal or sustainable origin of forest products;

202

(d)

access for forest products to the Parties or other markets;

(e)

perspectives on multilateral and plurilateral organisations and processes in
which they participate, which seek to promote sustainable forest management
or combat illegal logging;

(f)

issues referred to in Article 24.10 (Trade in forest products); and

(g)

any other issue related to forest products as agreed upon by the Parties.

2.

The Bilateral Dialogue on Forest Products shall meet within the first year of the entry
into force of this Agreement, and thereafter in accordance with Article 25.1.2.

3.

The Parties agree that discussions taking place in the Bilateral Dialogue on Forest
Products can inform discussions in the Committee on Trade and Sustainable
Development.
Article 25.4
Bilateral Dialogue on Raw Materials

1.

Recognising the importance of an open, non-discriminatory and transparent trading
environment based on rules and science, the Parties endeavour to establish and
maintain effective cooperation on raw materials. For the purposes of this
cooperation, raw materials include, but are not limited to, minerals, metals and
agricultural products with an industrial use.

2.

The Bilateral Dialogue on Raw Materials covers any relevant issue of mutual
interest, including:
(a)

to provide a forum of discussion on cooperation in the field of raw materials
between the Parties, to contribute to market access for raw material goods and
related services and investments and to avoid non-tariff barriers to trade for
raw materials;

(b)

to enhance mutual understanding in the field of raw materials with a view to
exchange information on best-practices and on the Parties’ regulatory policies
vis-à-vis raw materials;

(c)

to encourage activities that support corporate social responsibility in
accordance with internationally-recognised standards such as the OECD
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the OECD Due Diligence
Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas; and

(d)

to facilitate, as appropriate, consultation on the Parties’ positions in multilateral
or plurilateral fora where issues related to raw materials may be raised and
discussed.
Article 25.5

Enhanced cooperation on science, technology, research and innovation

203

1.

The Parties acknowledge the interdependence of science, technology, research and
innovation, and international trade and investment in increasing industrial
competitiveness and social and economic prosperity.

2.

Building upon this shared understanding, the Parties agree to strengthen their
cooperation in the areas of science, technology, research and innovation.

3.

The Parties shall endeavour to encourage, develop and facilitate cooperative
activities on a reciprocal basis in support of, or supplementary to the Agreement for
Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the European Community and
Canada, done at Halifax on 17 June 1995. The Parties agree to conduct these
activities on the basis of the following principles:
(a)

the activities are of mutual benefit to the Parties;

(b)

the Parties agree on the scope and parameters of the activities; and

(c)

the activities should take into account the important role of the private sector
and research institutions in the development of science, technology, research
and innovation, and the commercialisation of goods and services thereof.

4.

The Parties also recognise the importance of enhanced cooperation in science,
technology, research and innovation, such as activities initiated, developed or
undertaken by a variety of stakeholders, including the Canadian federal government,
the Canadian Provinces and Territories, the European Union and its Member States.

5.

Each Party shall encourage, in accordance with its law, the participation of the
private sector, research institutions and civil society within its territory in activities to
enhance cooperation.

204

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
ADMINISTRATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 26.1
CETA Joint Committee
1.

The Parties hereby establish the CETA Joint Committee comprising representatives
of the European Union and representatives of Canada. The CETA Joint Committee
shall be co-chaired by the Minister for International Trade of Canada and the
Member of the European Commission responsible for Trade, or their respective
designees.

2.

The CETA Joint Committee shall meet once a year or at the request of a Party. The
CETA Joint Committee shall agree on its meeting schedule and its agenda.

3.

The CETA Joint Committee is responsible for all questions concerning trade and
investment between the Parties and the implementation and application of this
Agreement. A Party may refer to the CETA Joint Committee any issue relating to the
implementation and interpretation of this Agreement, or any other issue concerning
trade and investment between the Parties.

4.

The CETA Joint Committee shall:

5.

(a)

supervise and facilitate the implementation and application of this Agreement
and further its general aims;

(b)

supervise the work of all specialised committees and other bodies established
under this Agreement;

(c)

without prejudice to Chapters Eight (Investment), Twenty-Two (Trade and
Sustainable Development), Twenty-Three (Trade and Labour), Twenty-Four
(Trade and Environment), and Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement), seek
appropriate ways and methods of preventing problems that might arise in areas
covered by this Agreement, or of resolving disputes that may arise regarding
the interpretation or application of this Agreement;

(d)

adopt its own rules of procedure;

(e)

make decisions as set out in Article 26.3; and

(f)

consider any matter of interest relating to an area covered by this Agreement.

The CETA Joint Committee may:
(a)

delegate responsibilities to the specialised committees established pursuant to
Article 26.2;

(b)

communicate with all interested parties including private sector and civil
society organisations;

(c)

consider or agree on amendments as provided in this Agreement;

(d)

study the development of trade between the Parties and consider ways to
further enhance trade relations between the Parties;
205

(e)

adopt interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement, which shall be
binding on tribunals established under Section F of Chapter Eight (Resolution
of investment disputes between investors and states) and Chapter Twenty-Nine
(Dispute Settlement);

(f)

make recommendations suitable for promoting the expansion of trade and
investment as envisaged in this Agreement;

(g)

change or undertake the tasks assigned to specialised committees established
pursuant to Article 26.2 or dissolve any of these specialised committees;

(h)

establish specialised committees and bilateral dialogues in order to assist it in
the performance of its tasks; and

(i)

take such other action in the exercise of its functions as decided by the Parties.
Article 26.2
Specialised committees

1.

The following specialised committees are hereby established, or in the case of the
Joint Customs Cooperation Committee referred to in paragraph (c), is granted
authority to act under the auspices of the CETA Joint Committee:
(a)

the Committee on Trade in Goods, which addresses matters concerning trade in
goods, tariffs, technical barriers to trade, the Protocol on the mutual acceptance
of the results of conformity assessment and intellectual property rights related
to goods. At the request of a Party, or upon a reference from the relevant
specialised committee, or when preparing a discussion in the CETA Joint
Committee, the Committee on Trade in Goods may also address matters arising
in the area of rules of origin, origin procedures, customs and trade facilitation
and border measures, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, government
procurement, or regulatory cooperation, if this facilitates the resolution of a
matter that cannot otherwise be resolved by the relevant specialised committee.
The Committee on Agriculture, the Committee on Wines and Spirits, and the
Joint Sectoral Group on Pharmaceuticals shall also be established under and
report to the Committee on Trade in Goods;

(b)

the Committee on Services and Investment, which addresses matters
concerning cross-border trade in services, investment, temporary entry,
electronic commerce, and intellectual property rights related to services. At the
request of a Party, or upon a reference from the relevant specialised committee,
or when preparing a discussion in the CETA Joint Committee, the Committee
on Services and Investment may also address matters arising in the area of
financial services or government procurement if this facilitates the resolution of
a matter that cannot otherwise be resolved by the relevant specialised
committee.
A Joint Committee on Mutual Recognition of Professional Qualifications shall
be established under and report to the Committee on Services and Investment;

(c)

the Joint Customs Cooperation Committee (JCCC), established under the 1998
Agreement between the European Community and Canada on Customs

206

Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters, done at Ottawa on 4
December 1997, which addresses matters under this Agreement concerning
rules of origin, origin procedures, customs and trade facilitation, border
measures and temporary suspension of preferential tariff treatment;
(d)

the Joint Management Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures,
which addresses matters concerning sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(e)

the Committee on Government Procurement, which addresses matters
concerning government procurement;

(f)

the Financial Services Committee, which addresses matters concerning
financial services;

(g)

the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development, which addresses
matters concerning sustainable development;

(h)

the Regulatory Cooperation Forum, which addresses matters concerning
regulatory cooperation; and

(i)

the CETA Committee on Geographical Indications, which addresses matters
concerning geographical indications.

2.

The specialised committees established pursuant to paragraph 1 shall operate
according to the provisions of paragraphs 3 through 5.

3.

The remit and tasks of the specialised committees established pursuant to paragraph
1 are further defined in the relevant Chapters and Protocols of this Agreement.

4.

Unless otherwise provided under this Agreement, or if the co-chairs decide
otherwise, the specialised committees shall meet once a year. Additional meetings
may be held at the request of a Party or of the CETA Joint Committee. They shall be
co-chaired by representatives of Canada and the European Union. The specialised
committees shall set their meeting schedule and agenda by mutual consent. They
shall set and modify their own rules of procedures, if they deem it appropriate. The
specialised committees may propose draft decisions for adoption by the CETA Joint
Committee, or take decisions when this Agreement so provides.

5.

Each Party shall ensure that when a specialised committee meets, all the competent
authorities for each issue on the agenda are represented, as each Party deems
appropriate, and that each issue can be discussed at the adequate level of expertise.

6.

The specialised committees shall inform the CETA Joint Committee of their
schedules and agenda sufficiently in advance of their meetings and shall report to the
CETA Joint Committee on results and conclusions from each of their meetings. The
creation or existence of a specialised committee does not prevent a Party from
bringing any matter directly to the CETA Joint Committee.
Article 26.3
Decision making

1.

The CETA Joint Committee shall, for the purpose of attaining the objectives of this
Agreement, have the power to make decisions in respect of all matters when this
Agreement so provides.
207

2.

The decisions made by the CETA Joint Committee shall be binding on the Parties,
subject to the completion of any necessary internal requirements and procedures, and
the Parties shall implement them. The CETA Joint Committee may also make
appropriate recommendations.

3.

The CETA Joint Committee shall make its decisions and recommendations by
mutual consent.
Article 26.4
Information sharing

When a Party submits to the CETA Joint Committee or any specialised committee established
under this Agreement information considered as confidential or protected from disclosure
under its laws, the other Party shall treat that information as confidential.
Article 26.5
CETA contact points
1.

Each Party shall promptly appoint a CETA contact point and notify the other Party
within 60 days following the entry into force of this Agreement.

2.

The CETA contact points shall:

3.

(a)

monitor the work of all institutional bodies established under this Agreement,
including communications relating to successors to those bodies;

(b)

coordinate preparations for committee meetings;

(c)

follow up on any decisions made by the CETA Joint Committee, as
appropriate;

(d)

except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, receive all notifications and
information provided pursuant to this Agreement and, as necessary, facilitate
communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement;

(e)

respond to any information requests pursuant to Article 27.2 (Provision of
information); and

(f)

consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement as
mandated by the CETA Joint Committee.

The CETA contact points shall communicate as required.
Article 26.6
Meetings

1.

Meetings referred to in this Chapter should be in person. Parties may also agree to
meet by videoconference or teleconference.

2.

The Parties shall endeavour to meet within 30 days after a Party receives a request to
meet by the other Party.

208

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
TRANSPARENCY
Article 27.1
Publication
1.

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative
rulings of general application respecting any matter covered by this Agreement are
promptly published or made available in such a manner as to enable interested
persons and the other Party to become acquainted with them.

2.

To the extent possible, each Party shall:
(a)

publish in advance any such measure that it proposes to adopt; and

(b)

provide interested persons and the other Party a reasonable opportunity to
comment on such proposed measures.
Article 27.2
Provision of information

1.

At the request of the other Party, a Party shall, to the extent possible, promptly
provide information and respond to questions pertaining to any existing or proposed
measure that materially affects the operation of this Agreement.

2.

Information provided under this Article is without prejudice as to whether the
measure is consistent with this Agreement.
Article 27.3
Administrative proceedings

To administer a measure of general application affecting matters covered by this Agreement
in a consistent, impartial and reasonable manner, each Party shall ensure that its
administrative proceedings applying measures referred to in Article 27.1 to a particular
person, good or service of the other Party in a specific case:
(a)

whenever possible, provide reasonable notice to a person of the other Party who is
directly affected by a proceeding, in accordance with domestic procedures, when a
proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a
statement of the legal authority under which the proceeding is initiated and a general
description of the issues in controversy;

(b)

provide a person referred to in sub-paragraph (a) a reasonable opportunity to present
facts and arguments in support of its position prior to any final administrative action,
when permitted by time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest; and

(c)

are conducted in accordance with its law.

209

Article 27.4
Review and appeal
1.

Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative
tribunals or procedures for the purpose of the prompt review and, if warranted,
correction of final administrative actions regarding matters covered by this
Agreement. Each Party shall ensure that its tribunals are impartial and independent of
the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement and that they do not
have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that, in any tribunals or procedures referred to in paragraph
1, the parties to the proceeding are provided with the right to:

3.

(a)

a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b)

a decision based on the evidence and submissions of record or, if required by
its law, the record compiled by the administrative authority.

Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided in its law,
that such decisions are implemented by and govern the practice of the offices or
authorities with respect to the administrative action at issue.
Article 27.5
Cooperation on promoting increased transparency

The Parties agree to cooperate in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora on ways to promote
transparency in respect of international trade and investment.

210

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
EXCEPTIONS
Article 28.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
residence means residence for tax purposes;
tax convention means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation or other
international taxation agreement or arrangement; and
tax and taxation measure includes an excise duty, but does not include:
(a)

a customs duty as defined in Article 1.1 (General definitions), and

(b)

a measure listed in exceptions (b) or (c)in the definition of “customs duty” in Article
1.1 (General definitions).
Article 28.2
Party-specific definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:
competition authority means:
(a)

for Canada, the Commissioner of Competition or a successor notified to the other
Party through the CETA contact points; and

(b)

for the European Union, the Commission of the European Union with respect to its
responsibilities pursuant to the competition laws of the European Union;

competition laws means:
(a)

for Canada, the Competition Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34; and

(b)

for the European Union, Articles 101, 102 and 106 of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union, of 13 December 2007, Council Regulation (EC) No.
139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings,
and their implementing regulations or amendments; and

information protected under its competition laws means:
(a)

for Canada, information within the scope of Section 29 of the Competition Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34; and

(b)

for the European Union, information within the scope of Article 28 of Council
Regulation (EC) No. 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the
rules on competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty or Article 17 of
Council Regulation (EC) No. 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of
concentrations between undertakings.

211

Article 28.3
General exceptions
1.

For the purposes of Article 30.8.5 (Termination, suspension or incorporation of other
existing agreements), Chapters Two (National Treatment and Market Access for
Goods), Five (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), and Six (Customs and Trade
Facilitation), the Protocol on rules of origin and origin procedures and Sections B
(Establishment of investment) and C (Non-discriminatory treatment) of Chapter
Eight (Investment), Article XX of the GATT 1994 is incorporated into and made part
of this Agreement. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article
XX (b) of the GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect
human, animal or plant life or health. The Parties understand that Article XX(g) of
the GATT 1994 applies to measures for the conservation of living and non-living
exhaustible natural resources.

2.

For the purposes of Chapters Nine (Cross-Border Trade in Services), Ten
(Temporary Entry and Stay of Natural Persons for Business Purposes), Twelve
(Domestic Regulations), Thirteen (Financial Services), Fourteen (International
Maritime Transport Services), Fifteen (Telecommunications), Sixteen (Electronic
Commerce), and Sections B (Establishment of investments) and C (Nondiscriminatory treatment) of Chapter Eight (Investment), subject to the requirement
that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where like conditions
prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in services, nothing in this Agreement shall
be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by a Party of measures
necessary:
(a)

to protect public security or public morals or to maintain public order;31

(b)

to protect human, animal or plant life or health;32 or

(c)

to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Agreement including those relating to:
(i)

the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the
effects of a default on contracts;

(ii)

the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing
and dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality
of individual records and accounts; or

(iii) safety.
Article 28.4
Temporary safeguard measures with regard to capital movements and payments
1.

31

32

Where, in exceptional circumstances, capital movements and payments, including
transfers, cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for the operation of the
The public security and public order exceptions may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently
serious threat is posed to one of the fundamental interests of society.
The Parties understand that the measures referred to in sub-paragraph (b) include environmental
measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

212

economic and monetary union of the European Union, the European Union may
impose safeguard measures that are strictly necessary to address such difficulties for
a period not to exceed 180 days.
2.

Measures imposed by the European Union pursuant to paragraph 1 shall not
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination in respect of Canada or
its investors compared to a third country or its investors. The European Union shall
inform Canada forthwith and present, as soon as possible, a schedule for the removal
of such measures.
Article 28.5
Restrictions in case of serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties

1.

Where Canada or a Member State of the European Union that is not a member of the
European Monetary Union experiences serious balance-of-payments or external
financial difficulties, or threat thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures
with regard to capital movements or payments, including transfers.

2.

Measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall:
(a)

not treat a Party less favourably than a third country in like situations;

(b)

be consistent with the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary
Fund, done at Bretton Woods on 22 July 1945, as applicable;

(c)

avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests
of a Party;

(d)

be temporary and phased out progressively as the situation specified in
paragraph 1 improves and shall not exceed 180 days. If extremely exceptional
circumstances arise such that a Party seeks to extend such measures beyond a
period of 180 days, it will consult in advance with the other Party regarding the
implementation of any proposed extension.

3.

In the case of trade in goods, a Party may adopt restrictive measures in order to
safeguard its balance-of-payments or external financial position. Such measures shall
be in accordance with the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on Balance of Payment
Provisions of the GATT 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.

4.

In the case of trade in services, a Party may adopt restrictive measures in order to
safeguard its balance-of-payments or external financial position. Such measures shall
be in accordance with the GATS.

5.

A Party that adopts or maintains a measure referred to in paragraph 1 shall promptly
notify the other Party and provide, as soon as possible, a schedule for their removal.

6.

Where the restrictions are adopted or maintained under this Article, consultations
between the Parties shall be held promptly in the CETA Joint Committee, if such
consultations are not otherwise taking place in a forum outside of this Agreement.
The consultations held under this paragraph shall assess the balance-of-payments or
external financial difficulty that led to the respective measures, taking into account,
among other things, such factors as:
(a)

the nature and extent of the difficulties;

213

7.

(b)

the external economic and trading environment; or

(c)

the availability of alternative corrective measures.

The consultations pursuant to paragraph 6 shall address the compliance of any
restrictive measures with paragraphs 1 through 4. The Parties shall accept all findings
of statistical and other facts presented by the International Monetary Fund (“IMF”)
relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves, balance-of-payments, and their
conclusions shall be based on the assessment by the IMF of the balance-of-payments
and the external financial situation of the Party concerned.
Article 28.6
National security

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
(a)

to require a Party to furnish or allow access to information if that Party determines
that the disclosure of this information would be contrary to its essential security
interests; or

(b)

to prevent a Party from taking an action that it considers necessary to protect its
essential security interests:
(i)

connected to the production of or traffic in arms, ammunition and implements
of war and to such traffic and transactions in other goods and materials,
services and technology undertaken, and to economic activities, carried out
directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military or other security
establishment;33

(ii)

taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or

(iii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which
they are derived; or
(c)

prevent a Party from taking any action in order to carry out its international
obligations for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.
Article 28.7
Taxation

1.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining any taxation measure that distinguishes between persons who are not in
the same situation, in particular with regard to their place of residence or with regard
to the place where their capital is invested.

2.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining any taxation measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion of
taxes pursuant to its tax laws or tax conventions.

33

The expression “traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war” in this Article is equivalent to the
expression “trade in arms, munitions and war material”.

214

3.

This Agreement does not affect the rights and obligations of a Party under a tax
convention. In the event of inconsistency between this Agreement and a tax
convention, that convention prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.

4.

Nothing in this Agreement or in any arrangement adopted under this Agreement shall
apply:
(a)

to a taxation measure of a Party that provides a more favourable tax treatment
to a corporation, or to a shareholder of a corporation, on the basis that the
corporation is wholly or partly owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by
one or more investors who are residents of that Party;

(b)

to a taxation measure of a Party that provides an advantage relating to the
contributions made to, or income of, an arrangement providing for the deferral
of, or exemption from, tax for pension, retirement, savings, education, health,
disability or other similar purposes, conditional on a requirement that that Party
maintains continuous jurisdiction over such arrangement;

(c)

to a taxation measure of a Party that provides an advantage relating to the
purchase or consumption of a particular service, conditional on a requirement
that the service be provided in the territory of that Party;

(d)

to a taxation measure of a Party that is aimed at ensuring the equitable and
effective imposition or collection of taxes, including a measure that is taken by
a Party in order to ensure compliance with the Party’s taxation system;

(e)

to a taxation measure that provides an advantage to a government, a part of a
government, or a person that is directly or indirectly owned, controlled or
established by a government;

(f)

to an existing non-conforming taxation measure not otherwise covered in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 4(a) through (e), to the continuation or prompt renewal of
such a measure, or an amendment of such a measure, provided that the
amendment does not decrease its conformity with the provisions of this
Agreement as it existed immediately before the amendment.

5.

For greater certainty, the fact that a taxation measure constitutes a significant
amendment to an existing taxation measure, takes immediate effect as of its
announcement, clarifies the intended application of an existing taxation measure, or
has an unexpected impact on an investor or covered investment, does not, in and of
itself, constitute a violation of Article 8.10 (Treatment of investors and of covered
investments).

6.

Articles 8.7 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 9.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment)
and 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment) do not apply to an advantage accorded by
a Party pursuant to a tax convention.

7.

(a)

Where an investor submits a request for consultations pursuant to Article 8.19
(Consultations) claiming that a taxation measure breaches an obligation under
Sections C (Non-discriminatory treatment) or D (Investment protection) of
Chapter Eight (Investment), the respondent may refer the matter for
consultation and joint determination by the Parties as to whether:
(i)

the measure is a taxation measure;

215

(ii)

the measure, if it is found to be a taxation measure, breaches an
obligation under Sections C (Non-discriminatory Treatment) or D
(Investment Protection) of Chapter Eight (Investment); or

(iii) there is an inconsistency between the obligations in this Agreement that
are alleged to have been breached and those of a tax convention.

8.

(b)

A referral pursuant to subparagraph (a) cannot be made later than the date the
Tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial. Where the
respondent makes such a referral the time periods or proceedings specified in
Section F (Resolution of investment disputes between investors and states) of
Chapter Eight (Investment) shall be suspended. If within 180 days from the
referral the Parties do not agree to consider the issue, or fail to make a joint
determination, the suspension of the time periods or proceedings shall no
longer apply and the investor may proceed with its claim.

(c)

A joint determination by the Parties pursuant to subparagraph (a) shall be
binding on the Tribunal.

(d)

Each Party shall ensure that its delegation for the consultations to be conducted
pursuant to subparagraph (a) shall include persons with relevant expertise on
the issues covered by this Article, including representatives from the relevant
tax authorities of each Party. For Canada, this means officials from the
Department of Finance.

For greater certainty,
(a)

taxation measure of a Party means a taxation measure adopted at any level of
government of a Party; and

(b)

for measures of a sub-national government, resident of a Party, means either
resident of that sub-national jurisdiction or resident of the Party of which it
forms a part.
Article 28.8
Disclosure of information

1.

This Agreement does not require a Party to furnish or allow access to information
which, if disclosed, would impede law enforcement or the disclosure of which is
prohibited or restricted under its law.

2.

In the course of a dispute settlement procedure under this Agreement,
(a)

a Party is not required to furnish or allow access to information protected under
its competition laws; and

(b)

a competition authority of a Party is not required to furnish or allow access to
information that is privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure.
Article 28.9
Exceptions applicable to culture

216

The Parties recall the exceptions applicable to culture as set out in the relevant provisions of
Chapters Seven (Subsidies), Eight (Investment), Nine (Cross-Border Trade in Services),
Twelve (Domestic Regulation) and Nineteen (Government Procurement).
Article 28.10
WTO waivers
If a right or obligation in this Agreement duplicates one under the WTO Agreement, the
Parties agree that a measure in conformity with a waiver decision adopted by the WTO
pursuant to Article IX of the WTO Agreement is deemed to be also in conformity with the
duplicated provision in this Agreement.

217

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
SECTION A
Initial provisions
Article 29.1
Cooperation
The Parties shall, at all times, endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this
Agreement, and shall make every attempt through cooperation and consultations to arrive at a
mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might affect its operation.
Article 29.2
Scope
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to any dispute
concerning the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement.
Article 29.3
Choice of forum
1.

Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter is without prejudice to
recourse to dispute settlement under the WTO Agreement or under any other
agreement to which the Parties are party.

2.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an obligation is equivalent in substance under this
Agreement and under the WTO Agreement, or under any other agreement to which
the Parties are party, a Party may not seek redress for the breach of such an
obligation in the two fora. In such case, once a dispute settlement proceeding has
been initiated under one agreement, the Party shall not bring a claim seeking redress
for the breach of the substantially equivalent obligation under the other agreement,
unless the forum selected fails, for procedural or jurisdictional reasons, other than
termination under paragraph 20 of Annex 29-A, to make findings on that claim.

3.

For the purposes of paragraph 2:
(a)

dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed to be
initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of
the DSU;

(b)

dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be initiated by
a Party’s request for the establishment of an arbitration panel under Article
29.6; and

(c)

dispute settlement proceedings under any other agreement are deemed to be
initiated by a Party’s request for the establishment of a dispute settlement panel
or tribunal in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.

218

4.

Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from implementing the suspension
of obligations authorised by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body. A Party may not
invoke the WTO Agreement to preclude the other Party from suspending obligations
pursuant to this Chapter.
SECTION B
Consultations and mediation
Article 29.4
Consultations

1.

A Party may request in writing consultations with the other Party regarding any
matter referred to in Article 29.2.

2.

The requesting Party shall transmit the request to the responding Party, and shall set
out the reasons for the request, including the identification of the specific measure at
issue and the legal basis for the complaint.

3.

Subject to paragraph 4, the Parties shall enter into consultations within 30 days of the
date of receipt of the request by the responding Party.

4.

In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable or seasonal goods, or
services that rapidly lose their trade value, consultations shall commence within 15
days of the date of receipt of the request by the responding Party.

5.

The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of
the matter through consultations. To this end, each Party shall:
(a)

provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of the matter at
issue;

(b)

protect any confidential or proprietary information exchanged in the course of
consultations as requested by the Party providing the information; and

(c)

make available the personnel of its government agencies or other regulatory
bodies who have expertise in the matter that is the subject of the consultations.

6.

Consultations are confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the Parties in
proceedings under this Chapter.

7.

Consultations shall take place in the territory of the responding Party unless the
Parties agree otherwise. Consultations may be held in person or by any other means
agreed to by the Parties.

8.

A Party’s proposed measure may be the subject of consultations under this Article
but may not be the subject of mediation under Article 29.5 or the dispute settlement
procedures under Section C.
Article 29.5
Mediation

The Parties may have recourse to mediation with regard to a measure if the measure adversely
affects trade and investment between the Parties. Mediation procedures are set out in Annex
29-C.
219

SECTION C
Dispute settlement procedures and compliance
Sub-section A
Dispute settlement procedures
Article 29.6
Request for the establishment of an arbitration panel
1.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, if a matter referred to in Article 29.4 has not been
resolved within:
(a)

45 days of the date of receipt of the request for consultations; or

(b)

25 days of the date of receipt of the request for consultations for matters
referred to in Article 29.4.4,

the requesting Party may refer the matter to an arbitration panel by providing its
written request for the establishment of an arbitration panel to the responding Party.
2.

The requesting Party shall identify in its written notice the specific measure at issue
and the legal basis for the complaint, including an explanation of how such measure
constitutes a breach of the provisions referred to in Article 29.2.
Article 29.7
Composition of the arbitration panel

1.

The arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.

2.

The Parties shall consult with a view to reaching an agreement on the composition of
the arbitration panel within 10 working days of the date of receipt by the responding
Party of the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel.

3.

In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the composition of the arbitration
panel within the time frame set out in paragraph 2, either Party may request the Chair
of the CETA Joint Committee, or the Chair’s delegate, to draw by lot the arbitrators
from the list established under Article 29.8. One arbitrator shall be drawn from the
sub-list of the requesting Party, one from the sub-list of the responding Party and one
from the sub-list of chairperson. If the Parties have agreed on one or more of the
arbitrators, any remaining arbitrator shall be selected by the same procedure in the
applicable sub-list of arbitrators. If the Parties have agreed on an arbitrator, other
than the chairperson, who is not a national of either Party, the chairperson and other
arbitrator shall be selected from the sub-list of chairpersons.

4.

The Chair of the CETA Joint Committee, or the Chair’s delegate, shall select the
arbitrators as soon as possible and normally within five working days of the request
referred to in paragraph 3 by either Party. The Chair, or the Chair’s delegate, shall
give a reasonable opportunity to representatives of each Party to be present when lots
are drawn. One of the chairpersons can perform the selection by lot alone if the other
chairperson was informed about the date, time and place of the selection by lot and
did not accept to participate within five working days of the request referred to in
paragraph 3.
220

5.

The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the last
of the three arbitrators is selected.

6.

If the list provided for in Article 29.8 is not established or if it does not contain
sufficient names at the time a request is made pursuant to paragraph 3, the three
arbitrators shall be drawn by lot from the arbitrators who have been proposed by one
or both of the Parties in accordance with Article 29.8.1.

7.

Replacement of arbitrators shall take place only for the reasons and according to the
procedure set out in paragraphs 21 through 25 of Annex 29-A.
Article 29.8
List of arbitrators

1.

The CETA Joint Committee shall, at its first meeting after the entry into force of this
Agreement, establish a list of at least 15 individuals, chosen on the basis of
objectivity, reliability and sound judgment, who are willing and able to serve as
arbitrators. The list shall be composed of three sub-lists: one sub-list for each Party
and one sub-list of individuals who are not nationals of either Party to act as
chairpersons. Each sub-list shall include at least five individuals. The CETA Joint
Committee may review the list at any time and shall ensure that the list conforms
with this Article.

2.

The arbitrators must have specialised knowledge of international trade law. The
arbitrators acting as chairpersons must also have experience as counsel or panellist in
dispute settlement proceedings on subject matters within the scope of this
Agreement. The arbitrators shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities
and not take instructions from any organisation or government, or be affiliated with
the government of any of the Parties, and shall comply with the Code of Conduct in
Annex 29-B.
Article 29.9
Interim panel report

1.

2.

3.

The arbitration panel shall present to the Parties an interim report within 150 days of
the establishment of the arbitration panel. The report shall contain:
(a)

findings of fact; and

(b)

determinations as to whether the responding Party has conformed with its
obligations under this Agreement.

Each Party may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on the interim
report, subject to any time limits set by the arbitration panel. After considering any
such comments, the arbitration panel may:
(a)

reconsider its report; or

(b)

make any further examination that it considers appropriate.

The interim report of the arbitration panel shall be confidential.

221

Article 29.10
Final panel report
1.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitration panel shall issue a report in
accordance with this Chapter. The final panel report shall set out the findings of fact,
the applicability of the relevant provisions of this Agreement and the basic rationale
behind any findings and conclusions that it makes. The ruling of the arbitration panel
in the final panel report shall be binding on the Parties.

2.

The arbitration panel shall issue to the Parties and to the CETA Joint Committee a
final report within 30 days of the interim report.

3.

Each Party shall make publicly available the final panel report, subject to paragraph
39 of Annex 29-A.
Article 29.11
Urgent proceedings

In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable or seasonal goods, or services that
rapidly lose their trade value, the arbitration panel and the Parties shall make every effort to
accelerate the proceedings to the greatest extent possible. The arbitration panel shall aim at
issuing an interim report to the Parties within 75 days of the establishment of the arbitration
panel, and a final report within 15 days of the interim report. Upon request of a Party, the
arbitration panel shall make a preliminary ruling within 10 days of the request on whether it
deems the case to be urgent.
Sub-section B
Compliance
Article 29.12
Compliance with the final panel report
The responding Party shall take any measure necessary to comply with the final panel report.
No later than 20 days after the receipt of the final panel report by the Parties, the responding
Party shall inform the other Party and the CETA Joint Committee of its intentions in respect
of compliance.
Article 29.13
Reasonable period of time for compliance
1.

If immediate compliance is not possible, no later than 20 days after the receipt of the
final panel report by the Parties, the responding Party shall notify the requesting
Party and the CETA Joint Committee of the period of time it will require for
compliance.

2.

In the event of disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of time in
which to comply with the final panel report, the requesting Party shall, within 20
days of the receipt of the notification made under paragraph 1 by the responding
Party, request in writing the arbitration panel to determine the length of the
reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the other
222

Party and to the CETA Joint Committee. The arbitration panel shall issue its ruling to
the Parties and to the CETA Joint Committee within 30 days from the date of the
request.
3.

The reasonable period of time may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.

4.

At any time after the midpoint in the reasonable period of time and at the request of
the requesting Party, the responding Party shall make itself available to discuss the
steps it is taking to comply with the final panel report.

5.

The responding Party shall notify the other Party and the CETA Joint Committee
before the end of the reasonable period of time of measures that it has taken to
comply with the final panel report.
Article 29.14
Temporary remedies in case of non-compliance

1.

If:
(a)

the responding Party fails to notify its intention to comply with the final panel
report under Article 29.12 or the time it will require for compliance under
Article 29.13.1;

(b)

at the expiry of the reasonable period of time, the responding Party fails to
notify any measure taken to comply with the final panel report; or

(c)

the arbitration panel on compliance referred to in paragraph 6 establishes that a
measure taken to comply is inconsistent with that Party’s obligations under the
provisions referred to in Article 29.2,

the requesting Party shall be entitled to suspend obligations or receive compensation.
The level of the nullification and impairment shall be calculated starting from the
date of notification of the final panel report to the Parties.
2.

Before suspending obligations, the requesting Party shall notify the responding Party
and the CETA Joint Committee of its intention to do so, including the level of
obligations it intends to suspend.

3.

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the suspension of obligations may
concern any provision referred to in Article 29.2 and shall be limited at a level
equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the violation.

4.

The requesting Party may implement the suspension 10 working days after the date
of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 2 by the responding Party,
unless a Party has requested arbitration under paragraphs 6 and 7.

5.

A disagreement between the Parties concerning the existence of any measure taken
to comply or its consistency with the provisions referred to in Article 29.2
(“disagreement on compliance”), or on the equivalence between the level of
suspension and the nullification or impairment caused by the violation
(“disagreement on equivalence”), shall be referred to the arbitration panel.

6.

A Party may reconvene the arbitration panel by providing a written request to the
arbitration panel, the other Party and the CETA Joint Committee. In case of a
disagreement on compliance, the arbitration panel shall be reconvened by the
223

requesting Party. In case of a disagreement on equivalence, the arbitration panel shall
be reconvened by the responding Party. In case of disagreements on both compliance
and on equivalence, the arbitration panel shall rule on the disagreement on
compliance before ruling on the disagreement on equivalence.
7.

The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the CETA Joint
Committee accordingly:
(a)

within 90 days of the request to reconvene the arbitration panel, in case of a
disagreement on compliance;

(b)

within 30 days of the request to reconvene the arbitration panel, in case of a
disagreement on equivalence;

(c)

within 120 days of the first request to reconvene the arbitration panel, in case
of a disagreement on both compliance and equivalence.

8.

The requesting Party shall not suspend obligations until the arbitration panel
reconvened under paragraphs 6 and 7 has delivered its ruling. Any suspension shall
be consistent with the arbitration panel’s ruling.

9.

The suspension of obligations shall be temporary and shall be applied only until the
measure found to be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 29.2 has
been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with those provisions,
as established under Article 29.15, or until the Parties have settled the dispute.

10.

At any time, the requesting Party may request the responding Party to provide an
offer for temporary compensation and the responding Party shall present such offer.
Article 29.15
Review of measures taken to comply after the suspension of obligations

1.

When, after the suspension of obligations by the requesting Party, the responding
Party takes measures to comply with the final panel report, the responding Party shall
notify the other Party and the CETA Joint Committee and request an end to the
suspension of obligations applied by the requesting Party.

2.

If the Parties do not reach an agreement on the compatibility of the notified measure
with the provisions referred to in Article 29.2 within 60 days of the date of receipt of
the notification, the requesting Party shall request in writing the arbitration panel to
rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party
and to the CETA Joint Committee. The final panel report shall be notified to the
Parties and to the CETA Joint Committee within 90 days of the date of submission of
the request. If the arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is in
conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 29.2, the suspension of
obligations shall be terminated.
SECTION D
General Provisions
Article 29.16
Rules of procedure
224

Dispute settlement procedure under this Chapter shall be governed by the rules of procedure
for arbitration in Annex 29-A, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
Article 29.17
General rule of interpretation
The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in accordance with
customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including those set out in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The arbitration panel shall also take into account
relevant interpretations in reports of Panels and the Appellate Body adopted by the WTO
Dispute Settlement Body.
Article 29.18
Rulings of the arbitration panel
The rulings of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations
provided for in this Agreement.
Article 29.19
Mutually agreed solutions
The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute under this Chapter at any time.
They shall notify the CETA Joint Committee and the arbitration panel of any such solution.
Upon notification of the mutually agreed solution, the arbitration panel shall terminate its
work and the proceedings shall be terminated.

225

CHAPTER THIRTY
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 30.1
Integral parts of this Agreement
The protocols, annexes, declarations, joint declarations, understandings and footnotes to this
Agreement constitute integral parts thereof.
Article 30.2
Amendments
1.

The Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. An amendment shall
enter into force after the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that they
have completed their respective applicable internal requirements and procedures
necessary for the entry into force of the amendment, or on the date agreed by the
Parties.

2.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the CETA Joint Committee may decide to amend the
protocols and annexes of this Agreement. The Parties may approve the CETA Joint
Committee’s decision in accordance with their respective internal requirements and
procedures necessary for the entry into force of the amendment. The decision shall
enter into force on a date agreed by the Parties. This procedure shall not apply to
amendments to Annexes I, II and III and to amendments to the annexes of Chapters
Eight (Investment), Nine (Cross-Border Trade in Services), Ten (Temporary Entry
and Stay of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) and Thirteen (Financial
Services), except for Annex 10-A (List of Contact Points of the Member States of the
European Union).
Article 30.3
Preference utilisation

For a period of 10 years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
exchange quarterly figures at the tariff line level for HS Chapters 1 through 97, on imports of
goods from the other Party that are subject to MFN-applied tariff rates and tariff preferences
under this Agreement. Unless the Parties decide otherwise, this period will be renewed for
five years and may be subsequently extended by them.
Article 30.4
Current account
The Parties shall authorise, in freely convertible currency and in accordance with Article VIII
of the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund done at Bretton Woods
on 22 July 1944, any payments and transfers on the current account of the balance of
payments between the Parties.

226

Article 30.5
Movement of capital
The Parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating the movement of capital
between them by continuing to implement their policies regarding the liberalisation of the
capital and financial account, and by supporting a stable and secure framework for long term
investment.
Article 30.6
Private rights
1.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as conferring rights or imposing
obligations on persons other than those created between the Parties under public
international law, nor as permitting this Agreement to be directly invoked in the
domestic legal systems of the Parties.

2.

A Party shall not provide for a right of action under its domestic law against the other
Party on the ground that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this
Agreement.
Article 30.7
Entry into force and provisional application

1.

The Parties shall approve this Agreement in accordance with their respective internal
requirements and procedures.

2.

This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following
the date the Parties exchange written notifications certifying that they have
completed their respective internal requirements and procedures or on such other
date as the Parties may agree.

3.

(a)

The Parties may provisionally apply this Agreement from the first day of the
month following the date on which the Parties have notified each other that
their respective internal requirements and procedures necessary for the
provisional application of this Agreement have been completed or on such
other date as the Parties may agree.

(b)

If a Party intends not to provisionally apply a provision of this Agreement, it
shall first notify the other Party of the provisions that it will not provisionally
apply and shall offer to enter into consultations promptly. Within 30 days of
the notification, the other Party may either object, in which case this
Agreement shall not be provisionally applied, or provide its own notification of
equivalent provisions of this Agreement, if any, that it does not intend to
provisionally apply. If within 30 days of the second notification, an objection is
made by the other Party, this Agreement shall not be provisionally applied.
The provisions that are not subject to a notification by a Party shall be
provisionally applied by that Party from the first day of the month following
the later notification, or on such other date as the Parties may agree, provided
the Parties have exchanged notifications under sub-paragraph(a).

227

4.

(c)

A Party may terminate the provisional application of this Agreement by written
notice to the other Party. Such termination shall take effect on the first day of
the second month following that notification.

(d)

If this Agreement, or certain provisions of this Agreement, is provisionally
applied, the Parties shall understand the term “entry into force of this
Agreement” as meaning the date of provisional application. The CETA Joint
Committee and other bodies established under this Agreement may exercise
their functions during the provisional application of this Agreement. Any
decisions adopted in the exercise of their functions will cease to be effective if
the provisional application of this Agreement is terminated under subparagraph
(c).

Canada shall submit notifications under this Article to the General Secretariat of the
Council of the European Union or its successor. The European Union shall submit
notifications under this Article to Canada’s Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade
and Development or its successor.
Article 30.8
Termination, suspension or incorporation of other existing agreements

1.

The agreements listed in Annex 30-A shall cease to have effect, and shall be replaced
and superseded by this Agreement. Termination of the agreements listed in Annex
30-A shall take effect from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2.

In the event of the provisional application of Chapter Eight (Investment) in
accordance with Article 30.7.3(a), the agreements listed in Annex 30-A, as well as
the rights and obligations derived therefrom shall be suspended as of the date of
provisional application. In the event the provisional application is terminated, the
suspension of the agreements listed in Annex 30-A shall cease.

3.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a claim may be submitted under an agreement
listed in Annex 30-A in accordance with the rules and procedures established in the
agreement if:
(a)

the treatment that is object of the claim was accorded when the agreement was
not suspended or terminated; and

(b)

no more than three years have elapsed since the date of suspension or
termination of the agreement.

4.

Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, if the provisional application of this Agreement
is terminated and this Agreement does not enter into force, a claim may be submitted
under Section F of Chapter Eight (Investment) within a period no longer than three
years following the date of termination of the provisional application, regarding any
matter arising during the provisional application of this Agreement, in accordance
with the rules and procedures established in this Agreement.

5.

The Agreement between the European Economic Community and Canada
concerning Trade and Commerce in Alcoholic Beverages, done at Brussels on 28
February 1989, as amended, (the “1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement”) and the
Agreement between the European Community and Canada on Trade in Wines and
Spirit Drinks, done at Niagara-on-the-Lake on 16 September 2003 (the “2003 Wines
228

and Spirit Drinks Agreement”) are incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, as amended by Annex 30-B.
6.

The provisions of the 1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement or the 2003 Wines and
Spirit Drinks Agreement, as amended and incorporated into this Agreement, prevail
to the extent that there is an inconsistency between the provisions of those
agreements and any other provision of this Agreement.

7.

The Agreement on Mutual Recognition between the European Community and
Canada (the “Agreement on Mutual Recognition”), done at London on 14 May 1998,
shall be terminated from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. In the event
of provisional application of Chapter Four (Technical Barriers to Trade) in
accordance with Article 30.7.3(a), the Agreement on Mutual Recognition, as well as
the rights and obligations derived therefrom, shall be suspended as of the date of
provisional application. In the event the provisional application is terminated, the
suspension of the Agreement on Mutual Recognition shall cease.

8.

The Parties recognise the achievements that have been accomplished under the
Agreement between the European Community and the Government of Canada on
sanitary measures to protect public and animal health in respect of trade in live
animals and animal products, done at Ottawa on 17 December 1998 (the “Veterinary
Agreement”) and confirm their intention to continue this work under this Agreement.
The Veterinary Agreement shall be terminated from the date of entry into force of
this Agreement. In the event of provisional application of Chapter Five (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures) in accordance with Article 30.7.3(a), the Veterinary
Agreement, as well as the rights and obligations derived therefrom, shall be
suspended as of the date of provisional application. In the event the provisional
application is terminated, the suspension of the Veterinary Agreement shall cease.

9.

The definition of “entry into force of this Agreement” in Article 30.7.3(d) shall not
apply to this Article.
Article 30.9
Termination

1.

A Party may denounce this Agreement by giving written notice of termination to the
General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union and the Department of
Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada, or their respective successors. This
Agreement shall be terminated 180 days after the date of that notice. The Party
giving a notice of termination shall also provide the CETA Joint Committee with a
copy of the notice.

2.

Notwithstanding paragraph 1, in the event that this Agreement is terminated, the
provisions of Chapter Eight (Investment) shall continue to be effective for a period of
20 years after the date of termination of this Agreement in respect of investments
made before that date. This paragraph shall not apply in the case of provisional
application of this Agreement.
Article 30.10
Accession of new Member States of the European Union
229

1.

The European Union shall notify Canada of any request made by a country to accede
to the European Union.

2.

During the negotiations between the European Union and the country seeking
accession, the European Union shall:
(a)

provide, upon the request of Canada, and to the extent possible, any
information regarding any matter covered by this Agreement; and

(b)

take into account any concerns expressed by Canada.

3.

The European Union shall notify Canada of the entry into force of any accession to
the European Union.

4.

Sufficiently in advance of the date of accession of a country to the European Union,
the CETA Joint Committee shall examine any effects of the accession on this
Agreement and shall decide on any necessary adjustment or transition measures.

5.

Any new Member State of the European Union shall accede to this Agreement from
the date of its accession to the European Union by means of a clause to that effect in
the act of accession to the European Union. If the act of accession to the European
Union does not provide for the automatic accession of the European Union Member
State to this Agreement, the European Union Member State concerned shall accede
to this Agreement by depositing an act of accession to this Agreement with the
General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union and the Department of
Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada, or their respective successors.
Article 30.11
Authentic texts

This Agreement is drawn up in duplicate in the Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch,
English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian,
Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish, and Swedish languages,
each version being equally authentic.

230

ANNEX 2-A
TARIFF ELIMINATION
1.

For the purposes of this Annex including each Party’s Schedule to this Annex, Year
1 means the period of time beginning on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement and ending on December 31 of the same calendar year that this
Agreement enters into force. Year 2 shall begin on the January 1 following the date
of entry into force of this Agreement, with each subsequent tariff reduction taking
effect on January 1 of each subsequent year.

2.

Except as otherwise provided in this Annex, the Parties shall eliminate all customs
duties on originating goods, of Chapters 1 through 97 of the Harmonized System that
provide for a most-favoured-nation (“MFN”) rate of customs duty, imported from the
other Party upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

3.

For originating goods from the other Party set out in each Party’s Schedule to this
Annex, the following staging categories apply to the elimination of customs duties by
each Party pursuant to Article 2.4:
(a)

duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category A in a
Party’s Schedule shall be duty-free on the date this Agreement enters into
force;

(b)

duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category B in a
Party’s Schedule shall be removed in four equal stages beginning on the date
this Agreement enters into force, and such goods shall be duty-free, effective
January 1 of year 4;

(c)

duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category C in a
Party’s Schedule shall be removed in six equal stages beginning on the date
this Agreement enters into force, and such goods shall be duty-free, effective
January 1 of year 6;

(d)

duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category D in a
Party’s Schedule shall be removed in eight equal stages beginning on the date
this Agreement enters into force, and such goods shall be duty-free, effective
January 1 of year 8.
For greater certainty, when the European Union applies a customs duty for the
items 1001 11 00, 1001 19 00, high quality common wheat of items ex 1001 91
90, and ex 1001 99 00, 1002 10 00 and 1002 90 00, at a level and in a manner
so that the duty-paid import price for a specified cereal will not be greater than
the effective intervention price, or if there is a modification of the current
system, the effective support price, increased by 55 per cent as set out in
Commission Regulation (EC) No 642/2010 of 20 July 2010 on rules of
application (cereal sector import duties) of Council Regulation (EC) No
1234/200734, the European Union shall apply the tariff elimination staging
category towards any calculated duty that would be applied as per the above
regulation, as follows:

34

OJEU L 187, 21.7.2010, p. 5.

231

Year

Applied Duty

1

87.5% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

2

75% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

3

62.5% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

4

50% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

5

37.5% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

6

25% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

7

12.5% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010

8 and each subsequent year

0% of the duty calculated as per EC Reg. 642/2010
(duty-free)

(e)

duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category S in a
Party’s Schedule shall be removed in three equal stages beginning on the fifth
anniversary of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and these goods
shall be duty-free, effective January 1 of year 8;

(f)

the ad valorem component of the customs duties on originating goods provided
for in the items in staging category “AV0+EP” in a Party's Schedule shall be
eliminated upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement; the tariff
elimination shall apply to the ad valorem duty only; the specific duty resulting
from the entry price system applicable for these originating goods shall be
maintained; and

(g)

duties on originating goods provided for in the items in staging category E in a
Party’s Schedule are exempt from tariff elimination.

4.

The base rate for determining the interim staged rate of customs duty for an item
shall be the MFN customs duty rate applied on 9 June 2009.

5.

For the purpose of the elimination of customs duties in accordance with Article 2.4,
interim staged rates shall be rounded down at least to the nearest tenth of a
percentage point or, if the rate of duty is expressed in monetary units, at least to the
nearest 0.001 of the official monetary unit of the Party.

Tariff Rate Quotas
6.

For the administration in Year 1 of each tariff rate quota established under this
Agreement, the Parties shall calculate the volume of that tariff rate quota by
discounting the prorated volume corresponding to the period running between
January 1 and the date of entry into force of the Agreement. This calculated in-quota
quantity shall be made available on the date this Agreement enters into force.

Processed shrimps transitional tariff rate quota
7.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQShrimps” in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (d) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
232

Aggregate Annual Quantity
35
(Metric Tonnes)

Year
1 through to 7

(b)

23,000

The European Union shall:
(i)

administer this tariff rate quota on a first-come first-served basis;

(ii)

administer this tariff rate quota on a calendar year basis with the full inquota quantity to be made available on January 1 of each year; and

(iii) not impose any end-use restriction on the imported good as a condition of
the application for or use of this tariff rate quota.
(c)

Prepared or preserved shrimps and prawns exported from Canada under
Section B of Appendix 1 (Origin Quotas) to Annex 1 (Product Specific Rules
of Origin) of the Protocol on Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures shall not
be imported into the European Union under this tariff rate quota.

(d)

Sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) apply to processed shrimps classified in the
following tariff lines: 1605 29 00, 1605 21 90, ex 0306 16 10, ex 0306 17 10,
ex 0306 26 10, and ex 0306 27 10, excluding in immediate packings of a net
content not exceeding 2 kg.

Frozen cod transitional tariff rate quota
8.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQCod” in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (c) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Aggregate Annual Quantity
36
(Metric Tonnes)

Year
1 through to 7

(b)

1,000

The European Union shall:
(i)

administer this tariff rate quota on a first-come first-served basis;

(ii)

administer this tariff rate quota on a calendar year basis with the full inquota quantity to be made available on January 1 of each year; and

(iii) not impose any specific end-use restriction on the imported good as a
condition of the application for or use of this tariff rate quota.
(c)

This paragraph applies to frozen cod, classified in tariff lines 0304 71 90 and
0304 79 10

Low and Medium Quality Common Wheat transitional tariff rate quota
9.

35
36

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQCW” in the European Union’s Schedule to this

Expressed in net weight.
Expressed in net weight.

233

Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (d) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Aggregate Annual Quantity
(Metric Tonnes)

Year
1 through to 7

100,000

(b)

The European Union shall administer this tariff rate quota in accordance with
the terms of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1067/2008 of 30 October 2008.

(c)

The above aggregate duty-free quantities shall include, beginning in year 1, the
38,853 tonne allocation to Canada as set out in Commission Regulation (EC)
No. 1067/2008.

(d)

This paragraph applies to common wheat of a quality, other than high quality,
classified in tariff lines ex 1001 91 90 and ex 1001 99 00.

Sweetcorn Tariff Rate Quota
10.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQSC” in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (c) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Aggregate Annual Quantity
37
(Metric Tonnes )

Year
1

1,333

2

2,667

3

4,000

4

5,333

5

6,667

6 and each subsequent year

8,000

(b)

(c)

The European Union shall:
(i)

administer this tariff rate quota on a first-come first-served basis; and

(ii)

administer this tariff rate quota on a calendar year basis with the full inquota quantity to be made available on January 1 of each year.

This paragraph applies to the following tariff lines: 0710 40 00 (only available
during the time period leading up to the elimination of duties for such good as
per the staging category applicable to this item in the European Union’s
Schedule to this Annex) and 2005 80 00.

Bison Tariff Rate Quota
11.

37

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQB3” in the European Union’s Schedule to this

Expressed in net weight.

234

Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (d) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Year
1 and each subsequent year

Aggregate Annual Quantity
(Metric Tonnes – Carcass Weight
Equivalent)
3,000

(b)

When calculating quantities imported, the conversion factors specified in
paragraph 21 shall be utilized to convert Product Weight to Carcass Weight
Equivalent.

(c)

The European Union shall:

(d)

(i)

administer this tariff rate quota on a first-come first-served basis; and

(ii)

administer this tariff rate quota on a calendar year basis with the full inquota quantity to be made available on January 1 of each year.

This paragraph applies to bison classified in the following tariff lines: ex 0201
10 00, ex 0201 20 20, ex 0201 20 30, ex 0201 20 50, ex 0201 20 90, ex 0201
30 00, ex 0202 10 00, ex 0202 20 10, ex 0202 20 30, ex 0202 20 50, ex 0202
20 90, ex 0202 30 10, ex 0202 30 50, ex 0202 30 90, ex 0206 10 95, ex 0206
29 91, ex 0210 20 10, ex 0210 20 90, ex 0210 99 51, ex 0210 99 59

Fresh or Chilled Beef and Veal Tariff Rate Quota
12.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQB1” in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (f) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Year

Aggregate Annual Quantity
(Metric Tonnes – Carcass Weight
Equivalent)

1

5,140

2

10,280

3

15,420

4

20,560

5

25,700

6 and each subsequent year

30,840

(b)

The aggregate annual duty-free quantities in the table above shall be increased,
beginning in year 1, by 3,200 metric tonnes product weight (4,160 metric
tonnes carcass weight equivalent) resulting from the application of Council
Regulation (EC) No 617/2009 of 13 July 2009 opening an autonomous tariff
quota for imports of high-quality beef.

(c)

When calculating quantities imported, the conversion factors specified in
paragraph 21 shall be utilized to convert Product Weight to Carcass Weight
Equivalent.
235

(d)

The European Union shall administer this tariff rate quota, including the
additional quantities as outlined in sub-paragraph (b), either through an import
licensing system as outlined in the Declaration on Tariff Rate Quota
Administration or as otherwise agreed to between the Parties.

(e)

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (d), paragraphs 19 and 20 shall apply to this
paragraph.

(f)

This paragraph applies to beef and veal classified in the following tariff lines:
ex 0201 10 00, ex 0201 20 20, ex 0201 20 30, ex 0201 20 50, ex 0201 20 90,
ex 0201 30 00 and ex 0206 10 95.

Frozen or Other Beef and Veal Tariff Rate Quota
13.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TQB2” in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (e) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Year

Aggregate Annual Quantity
(Metric Tonnes – Carcass Weight
Equivalent)

1

2,500

2

5,000

3

7,500

4

10,000

5

12,500

6 and each subsequent year

15,000

(b)

When calculating quantities imported, the conversion factors specified in
paragraph 21 shall be utilized to convert Product Weight to Carcass Weight
Equivalent.

(c)

The European Union shall administer this tariff rate quota either through an
import licensing system as outlined in the Declaration on Tariff Rate Quota
Administration or as otherwise agreed to between the Parties.

(d)

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (c), paragraphs 19 and 20 shall apply.

(e)

This paragraph applies to beef and veal classified in the following tariff lines:
ex 0202 10 00, ex 0202 20 10, ex 0202 20 30, ex 0202 20 50, ex 0202 20 90,
ex 0202 30 10, ex 0202 30 50, ex 0202 30 90, ex 0206 29 91, ex 0210 20 10,
ex 0210 20 90, ex 0210 99 51 and ex 0210 99 59.

High Quality Fresh, Chilled and Frozen Meat of Bovine Animals Tariff Rate Quota
14.

Originating goods that are exported from Canada and are imported into the European
Union through the European Union’s existing WTO tariff quota for high quality
fresh, chilled and frozen meat of bovine animals covered by CN tariff headings ex
0201 and ex 0202 and for products covered by CN tariff lines ex 0206 10 95 and ex
0206 29 91 of 11,500 tonnes product weight, as set out in Commission Implementing
236

Regulation (EU) No 593/2013 of 21 June 2013, shall be duty-free on the date this
Agreement enters into force.
Pork Tariff Rate Quota
15.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items listed with the notation “TQP” in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (f) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Year

Aggregate Annual Quantity
(Metric Tonnes – Carcass Weight
Equivalent)

1

12,500

2

25,000

3

37,500

4

50,000

5

62,500

6 and each subsequent year

75,000

(b)

The aggregate annual duty-free quantities in the table above shall be increased,
beginning in year 1, by 4,624 metric tonnes product weight (5,549 metric
tonnes carcass weight equivalent) pursuant to the volume established in the
European Union’s Canada-specific WTO tariff quota for pig-meat.

(c)

When calculating quantities imported, the conversion factors specified in
paragraph 21 shall be utilized to convert Product Weight to Carcass Weight
Equivalent.

(d)

The European Union shall administer this tariff rate quota, including the
additional quantities from the European Union’s Canada-specific WTO tariff
quota for pig-meat as outlined in sub-paragraph (b), either through an import
licensing system as outlined in the Declaration on Tariff Rate Quota
Administration or as otherwise agreed to between the Parties.

(e)

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (d), paragraphs 19 and 20 shall apply to this
paragraph.

(f)

This paragraph applies to the following tariff lines:
0203 12 11, 0203 12 19, 0203 19 11, 0203 19 13, 0203 19 15, 0203 19 55,
0203 19 59, 0203 22 11, 0203 22 19, 0203 29 11, 0203 29 13, 0203 29 15,
0203 29 55, 0203 29 59, 0210 11 11, 0210 11 19, 0210 11 31, and 0210 11 39.

Cheese Tariff Rate Quota
16.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TRQ Cheese” in Canada’s Schedule to this Annex and
listed in sub-paragraph (d) shall be duty-free in the years specified below:

237

Aggregate Annual Quantity
38
(Metric Tonnes )

Year
1

2,667

2

5,333

3

8,000

4

10,667

5

13,333

6 and each subsequent year

16,000

(b)

Canada shall administer this tariff rate quota either through an import licensing
system as outlined in the Declaration on Tariff Rate Quota Administration or as
otherwise agreed to between the Parties.

(c)

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (b), paragraphs 19 and 20 shall apply to this
paragraph.

(d)

This paragraph applies to the following tariff lines:
0406.10.10, 0406.20.11, 0406.20.91, 0406.30.10, 0406.40.10, 0406.90.11,
0406.90.21, 0406.90.31, 0406.90.41, 0406.90.51, 0406.90.61, 0406.90.71,
0406.90.81, 0406.90.91, 0406.90.93, 0406.90.95, and 0406.90.98.

Industrial Cheese Tariff Rate Quota
17.

(a)

Originating goods in the following aggregate quantities and provided for in
items with the notation “TRQ Industrial Cheese” in Canada’s Schedule to this
Annex and listed in sub-paragraph (d) shall be duty-free in the years specified
below:
Aggregate Annual Quantity
39
(Metric Tonnes )

Year

38
39

1

283

2

567

3

850

4

1,133

5

1,417

6 and each subsequent year

1,700

(b)

Canada shall administer this tariff rate quota either through an import licensing
system as outlined in the Declaration on Tariff Rate Quota Administration or as
otherwise agreed to between the Parties.

(c)

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (b), paragraphs 19 and 20 shall apply to this
paragraph.

Expressed in net weight.
Expressed in net weight.

238

(d)

This paragraph applies to industrial cheese, which means cheese used as
ingredients for further food processing (secondary manufacturing) imported in
bulk (not for retail sale), classified in the following tariff lines:
ex 0406.10.10, ex 0406.20.11, ex 0406.20.91, ex 0406.30.10, ex 0406.40.10,
ex 0406.90.11, ex 0406.90.21, ex 0406.90.31, ex 0406.90.41, ex 0406.90.51,
ex 0406.90.61, ex 0406.90.71, ex 0406.90.81, ex 0406.90.91, ex 0406.90.93,
ex 0406.90.95, and ex 0406.90.98.

WTO Cheese Tariff Rate Quota
18.

Canada shall reallocate, beginning in year 1 of this Agreement, 800 tonnes of
Canada’s 20,411,866 kilogram WTO Tariff Rate Quota for cheese to the European
Union.

Under-fill mechanism
19.

With respect to the tariff rate quotas set out in paragraphs 12, 13, 15, 16, and 17:
(a)

If a tariff rate quota is under-filled, defined as less than 75 per cent of the
annual aggregate quantity actually imported into the Party under the tariff rate
quota in a given year, the Parties shall meet, upon the request of a Party, in the
framework of the Committee on Agriculture established under Article 26.2.1
(a) (Committees) in order to promptly address the underlying causes of the
under-fill or any other questions affecting the smooth operation of the tariff
rate quota.

(b)

If a tariff rate quota is under-filled, defined as less than 75 per cent of the
annual aggregate quantity actually imported into the Party under the tariff rate
quota in a given year for three consecutive years, and where such under-fill is
not linked to scarce supply or demand of the relevant product, the
administration of the quota for the following year(s) shall be made on a firstcome first-served basis. To demonstrate scarce supply or demand, a Party shall
clearly demonstrate on a quantifiable basis that either adequate supply to fill
the tariff rate quota is not available in the country of export or that the tariff
rate quota quantity could not be consumed in the importing market. If the
Parties disagree on the reasons leading to under-fill, the matter shall be subject
to binding arbitration at the request of a Party.

(c)

If subsequent to the under-fill referred to in (b), there is full use of the tariff
rate quota, defined as 90 per cent or more of the annual aggregate quantity
actually imported into the Party under the tariff rate quota in a given year for
two consecutive years, the Parties may consider returning to a licencing system
following consultations between the Parties on the necessity and opportunity of
such reversion and on the features of such licencing system.

Review clause
20.

(a)

With respect to the tariff rate quotas set out in paragraphs 12, 13, 15, 16, and
17, both at the mid-term and at the end of the phase-in period of any of these
tariff rate quotas, or at any other time upon motivated request of a Party, the
Parties shall review the operation of the relevant tariff rate quota administration
system in light notably of its effectiveness in ensuring quota utilisation, market

239

conditions, and administrative burdens associated with the system for the
economic operators and for the Parties.
(b)

With respect to the tariff rate quotas set out in paragraphs 16 and 17, the review
referred to in sub-paragraph (a) shall also include the allocation method
allowing for new entrants.

(c)

With respect to the tariff rate quotas set out in paragraphs 12, 13, and 15, the
review referred to in sub-paragraph (a) shall also include the consequences of
any tariff rate quota administration modalities agreed with a third country for
the same products in the framework of other trade negotiations involving the
Parties and would include the possibility of providing the option to the
exporting Party of transitioning to the approach agreed to in another agreement.
The conditions of competition in North America will be a necessary part of the
review.

Conversion Factors
21.

With respect to the tariff rate quotas set out in paragraphs 11, 12, 13, and 15, the
following conversion factors shall be utilized to convert Product Weight to Carcass
Weight Equivalent:
(a)

Tariff Rate Quotas set out in paragraphs 11, 12 and 13:
Tariff Line

Tariff Line Description
(for illustrative purposes only)

Conversion
Factor

0201 10 00

Carcases or half-carcases of bovine animals, fresh or
chilled

100%

0201 20 20

“Compensated” quarters of bovine animals with bone in,
fresh or chilled

100%

0201 20 30

Unseparated or separated forequarters of bovine animals,
with bone in, fresh or chilled

100%

0201 20 50

Unseparated or separated hindquarters of bovine animals,
with bone in, fresh or chilled

100%

0201 20 90

Fresh or chilled bovine cuts, with bone in (excl. carcases
and half-carcases, “compensated quarters”, forequarters
and hindquarters)

100%

0201 30 00

Fresh or chilled bovine meat, boneless

130%

0206 10 95

Fresh or chilled bovine thick and thin skirt (excl. for
manufacture of pharmaceutical products)

100%

0202 10 00

Frozen bovine carcases and half-carcases

100%

240

Tariff Line

Tariff Line Description
(for illustrative purposes only)

Conversion
Factor

0202 20 10

Frozen “compensated” bovine quarters, with bone in

100%

0202 20 30

Frozen unseparated or separated bovine forequarters, with
bone in

100%

0202 20 50

Frozen unseparated or separated bovine hindquarters, with
bone in

100%

0202 20 90

Frozen bovine cuts, with bone in (excl. carcases and halfcarcases, “compensated” quarters, forequarters and
hindquarters)

100%

0202 30 10

Frozen bovine boneless forequarters, whole or cut in max.
5 pieces, each quarter in 1 block; “compensated” quarters
in 2 blocks, one containing the forequarter, whole or cut in
max. 5 pieces, and the other the whole hindquarter, excl.
the tenderloin, in one piece

130%

0202 30 50

Frozen bovine boneless crop, chuck and blade and brisket
cuts

130%

0202 30 90

Frozen bovine boneless meat (excl. forequarters, whole or
cut into a maximum of five pieces, each quarter being in a
single block “compensated” quarters in two blocks, one of
which contains the forequarter, whole or cut into a
maximum of five pieces, and the other the whole
hindquarter, excl. the tenderloin, in one piece)

130%

0206 29 91

Frozen bovine thick and thin skirt (excl. for manufacture of
pharmaceutical products)

100%

0210 20 10

Meat of bovine animals, salted, in brine, dried or smoked,
with bone in

100%

0210 20 90

Boneless meat of bovine animals, salted, in brine, dried or
smoked

135%

0210 99 51

Edible thick skirt and thin skirt of bovine animals, salted, in
brine, dried or smoked

100%

0210 99 59

Edible offal of bovine animals, salted, in brine, dried or
smoked (excl. thick skirt and thin skirt)

100%

(b)

Tariff Rate Quota set out in paragraph 15:
Tariff Line

Tariff Line Description
(for illustrative purposes only)

241

Conversion
Factor

Tariff Line

Tariff Line Description
(for illustrative purposes only)

Conversion
Factor

0203 12 11

Fresh or chilled with bone in, domestic swine hams and
cuts thereof

100%

0203 12 19

Fresh or chilled with bone in, domestic swine shoulders
and cuts thereof

100%

0203 19 11

Fresh or chilled fore-ends and cuts thereof of domestic
swine

100%

0203 19 13

Fresh or chilled loins and cuts bone-in thereof of domestic
swine

100%

0203 19 15

Fresh or chilled bellies “streaky” and cuts thereof of
domestic swine

100%

0203 19 55

Fresh or chilled boneless meat of domestic swine (excl.
bellies and cuts thereof)

120%

0203 19 59

Fresh or chilled meat of domestic swine, with bone in
(excl. carcases and half-carcases, hams, shoulders and cuts
thereof, and fore-ends, loins, bellies and cuts thereof)

100%

0203 22 11

Frozen bone-in hams and cuts thereof of domestic swine

100%

0203 22 19

Frozen bone-in shoulders and cuts thereof of domestic
swine

100%

0203 29 11

Frozen fore-ends and cuts thereof of domestic swine

100%

0203 29 13

Frozen loins and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone
in

100%

0203 29 15

Frozen bellies “streaky” and cuts thereof of domestic swine

100%

0203 29 55

Frozen boneless meat of domestic swine (excl. bellies and
cuts thereof)

120%

0203 29 59

Frozen meat of domestic swine, with bone in (excl.
carcases and half-carcases, hams, shoulders and cuts
thereof, and fore-ends, loins, bellies and cuts thereof)

100%

0210 11 11

Domestic swine hams and cuts thereof, salted or in brine,
with bone in

100%

0210 11 19

Domestic swine shoulders and cuts thereof, salted or in
brine, with bone in

100%

242

Tariff Line

Tariff Line Description
(for illustrative purposes only)

Conversion
Factor

0210 11 31

Domestic swine hams and cuts thereof, dried or smoked,
with bone in

120%

0210 11 39

Domestic swine shoulders and cuts thereof, dried or
smoked, with bone in

120%

243

ANNEX 2-A
Tariff Schedule of Canada
Tariff
Item
0105.11.22

Broilers for domestic production: Over access commitment

0105.94.92

Other: Over access commitment

0105.99.12

Turkeys: Over access commitment

0207.11.92

Other: Over access commitment

0207.12.92

Other: Over access commitment

0207.13.92

Other: Over access commitment, bone in

0207.13.93

Other: Over access commitment, boneless

0207.14.22

Livers: Over access commitment

0207.14.92

Other: Over access commitment, bone in

0207.14.93

Other: Over access commitment, boneless

0207.24.12

Canner pack: Over access commitment

0207.24.92

Other: Over access commitment

Description

Base Rate

244

238% but not less than
30.8¢ each
238% but not less than
$1.25/kg
154.5% but not less than
$1.60/kg
238% but not less than
$1.67/kg
238% but not less than
$1.67/kg
249% but not less than
$3.78/kg
249% but not less than
$6.74/kg
238% but not less than
$6.45/kg
249% but not less than
$3.78/kg
249% but not less than
$6.74/kg
154.5% but not less than
$2.11/kg
154.5% but not less than

Staging
Category
E

Note
SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

Tariff
Item

Description

Base Rate

0207.25.12

Canner pack: Over access commitment

0207.25.92

Other: Over access commitment

0207.26.20

Over access commitment, bone in

0207.26.30

Over access commitment, boneless

0207.27.12

Livers: Over access commitment

0207.27.92

Other: Over access commitment, bone in

0207.27.93

Other: Over access commitment, boneless

0209.90.20

Fat of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, over access commitment

0209.90.40

Fat of turkeys, over access commitment

0210.99.12

0210.99.15

Meat of poultry: Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, over access
commitment, bone in
Meat of poultry: Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, over access
commitment, boneless
Meat of poultry: Of turkeys, over access commitment, bone in

0210.99.16

Meat of poultry: Of turkeys, over access commitment, boneless

0210.99.13

245

$1.95/kg
154.5% but not less than
$2.11/kg
154.5% but not less than
$1.95/kg
165% but not less than
$2.94/kg
165% but not less than
$4.82/kg
154.5% but not less than
$4.51/kg
165% but not less than
$2.94/kg
165% but not less than
$4.82/kg
249% but not less than
$6.74/kg
165% but not less than
$4.82/kg
249% but not less than
$5.81/kg
249% but not less than
$10.36/kg
165% but not less than
$3.67/kg
165% but not less than

Staging
Category

Note

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

Tariff
Item

Description

0401.10.20

Over access commitment

0401.20.20

Over access commitment

0401.40.20

Over access commitment

0401.50.20

Over access commitment

0402.10.20

Over access commitment

0402.21.12

Milk: Over access commitment

0402.21.22

Cream: Over access commitment

0402.29.12

Milk: Over access commitment

0402.29.22

Cream: Over access commitment

0402.91.20

Over access commitment

0402.99.20

Over access commitment

0403.10.20

Over access commitment

0403.90.12

Powdered buttermilk: Over access commitment

Base Rate
$6.03/kg
241% but not less than
$34.50/hl
241% but not less than
$34.50/hl
292.5% but not less than
$2.48/kg
292.5% but not less than
$2.48/kg
201.5% but not less than
$2.01/kg
243% but not less than
$2.82/kg
295.5% but not less than
$4.29/kg
243% but not less than
$2.82/kg
295.5% but not less than
$4.29/kg
259% but not less than
78.9¢/kg
255% but not less than
95.1¢/kg
237.5% but not less than
46.6¢/kg
208% but not less than

246

Staging
Category

Note

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

Tariff
Item

Description

0403.90.92

Other: Over access commitment

0404.10.22

Powdered whey: Over access commitment

0404.10.90
0404.90.20

Other
Over access commitment

0405.10.20

Over access commitment

0405.20.20

Over access commitment

0405.90.20

Over access commitment

0406.10.10

Within access commitment

0406.10.20

Over access commitment

0406.20.11

Cheddar and Cheddar types: Within access commitment

0406.20.12

Cheddar and Cheddar types: Over access commitment

0406.20.91

Other: Within access commitment

Base Rate
$2.07/kg
216.5% but not less than
$2.15/kg
208% but not less than
$2.07/kg
11%
270% but not less than
$3.15/kg
298.5% but not less than
$4.00/kg
274.5% but not less than
$2.88/kg
313.5% but not less than
$5.12/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$4.52/kg
2.84¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$3.58/kg
3.32¢/kg

247

Staging
Category

Note

E

SSG

E

SSG

C
E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

A

TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG

E
A

E
A

TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial

Tariff
Item

Description

Base Rate

0406.20.92

Other: Over access commitment

245.5% but not less than
$5.11/kg
3.32¢/kg

0406.30.10

Within access commitment

0406.30.20

Over access commitment

0406.40.10

Within access commitment

0406.40.20

Over access commitment

0406.90.11

Cheddar and Cheddar types: Within access commitment

0406.90.12

Cheddar and Cheddar types: Over access commitment

0406.90.21

Camembert and Camembert types: Within access commitment

0406.90.22

Camembert and Camembert types: Over access commitment

0406.90.31

Brie and Brie types: Within access commitment

245.5% but not less than
$4.34/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$5.33/kg
2.84¢/kg

248

245.5% but not less than
$3.53/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$5.78/kg
3.32¢/kg

Staging
Category

Note

E

Cheese
SSG

A

E
A

E
A

E
A

E
A

TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese

Tariff
Item
0406.90.32

Brie and Brie types: Over access commitment

0406.90.41

Gouda and Gouda types: Within access commitment

0406.90.42

Gouda and Gouda types: Over access commitment

0406.90.51

Provolone and Provolone types: Within access commitment

0406.90.52

Provolone and Provolone types: Over access commitment

0406.90.61

Mozzarella and Mozzarella types: Within access commitment

0406.90.62

Mozzarella and Mozzarella types: Over access commitment

0406.90.71

Swiss/Emmental and Swiss/Emmental types: Within access commitment

0406.90.72

Swiss/Emmental and Swiss/Emmental types: Over access commitment

0406.90.81

Gruyère and Gruyère types: Within access commitment

0406.90.82

Gruyère and Gruyère types: Over access commitment

Description

Base Rate
245.5% but not less than
$5.50/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$4.23/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$5.08/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$3.53/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$4.34/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$5.26/kg
249

Staging
Category
E
A

E
A

E
A

E
A

E
A

E

Note
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG

Tariff
Item
0406.90.91

Other: Havarti and Havarti types, within access commitment

3.32¢/kg

0406.90.92

Other: Havarti and Havarti types, over access commitment

0406.90.93

Other: Parmesan and Parmesan types, within access commitment

245.5% but not less than
$4.34/kg
3.32¢/kg

0406.90.94

Other: Parmesan and Parmesan types, over access commitment

0406.90.95

Other: Romano and Romano types, within access commitment

0406.90.96

Other: Romano and Romano types, over access commitment

0406.90.98

Other: Other, within access commitment

0406.90.99

Other: Other, over access commitment

0407.11.12

Hatching, for broilers: Over access commitment

0407.11.92

Other: Over access commitment

0407.21.20

Over access commitment

0407.90.12

Of the fowls of the species Gallus domesticus: Over access commitment

Description

Base Rate

250

245.5% but not less than
$5.08/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$5.15/kg
3.32¢/kg

245.5% but not less than
$3.53/kg
238% but not less than
$2.91/dozen
163.5% but not less than
79.9¢/dozen
163.5% but not less than
79.9¢/dozen
163.5% but not less than

Staging
Category
A

E
A

E
A

E
A

Note
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG
TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG

E

TRQ Cheese,
TRQ Industrial
Cheese
SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

Tariff
Item

Description

Base Rate

0408.11.20
0408.19.20
0408.91.20
0408.99.20
0603.11.00
0603.13.10
0603.13.90
0603.14.00
1003.10.12
1003.90.12
1107.10.12
1107.10.92
1107.20.12
1108.13.00
1517.10.20
1517.90.22

Over access commitment
Over access commitment
Over access commitment
Over access commitment
Roses
Cymbidium
Other
Chrysanthemums
For malting purposes: Over access commitment
For malting purposes: Over access commitment
Whole: Over access commitment
Other: Over access commitment
Whole: Over access commitment
Potato starch
Over access commitment
Substitutes for butter: Over access commitment

1601.00.22

Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, other than in cans or glass jars:
Other than spent fowl, over access commitment

1601.00.32
1602.20.22

Of turkeys, other than in cans or glass jars: Over access commitment
Paste, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, not in cans or glass jars:
Over access commitment
Paste, of turkeys, not in cans or glass jars: Over access commitment

1602.20.32

251

79.9¢/dozen
$6.12/kg
$1.52/kg
$6.12/kg
$1.52/kg
10.5%
16%
12.5%
8%
94.5%
94.5%
$157.00/tonne
$160.10/tonne
$141.50/tonne
10.5%
82.28¢/kg
218% but not less than
$2.47/kg
238%

Staging
Category

Note

E
E
E
E
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
C
C
E
E

SSG
SSG
SSG
SSG

E

SSG

154.5%
238%

E
E

SSG
SSG

154.5%

E

SSG

SSG
SSG

Tariff
Item
1602.31.13

Prepared meals: Other, over access commitment, bone in

1602.31.14

Prepared meals: Other, over access commitment, boneless

1602.31.94

Other: Other, over access commitment, bone in

1602.31.95

Other: Other, over access commitment, boneless

1602.32.13

Prepared meals: Other, over access commitment, bone in

1602.32.14

Prepared meals: Other, over access commitment, boneless

1602.32.94

Other: Other, over access commitment, bone in

1602.32.95

Other: Other, over access commitment, boneless

1701.91.90
1701.99.90
1806.20.22

Other
Other
Chocolate ice cream mix or ice milk mix: Over access commitment

1806.90.12

Chocolate ice cream mix or ice milk mix: Over access commitment

1901.20.12

In packages of a weight not exceeding 11.34 kg each: Containing more
than 25% by weight of butterfat, not put up for retail sale, over access
commitment

Description

Base Rate

252

169.5% but not less than
$3.76/kg
169.5% but not less than
$6.18/kg
165% but not less than
$3.67/kg
165% but not less than
$6.03/kg
253% but not less than
$5.91/kg
253% but not less than
$10.54/kg
249% but not less than
$5.81/kg
249% but not less than
$10.36/kg
$30.86/tonne
$30.86/tonne
265% but not less than
$1.15/kg
265% but not less than
$1.15/kg
246% but not less than
$2.85/kg

Staging
Category
E

Note
SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

S
S
E

SSG

E

SSG

E

SSG

Tariff
Item
1901.20.22

1901.90.32

1901.90.34

1901.90.52

1901.90.54

2105.00.92
2106.90.32

2106.90.34

2106.90.52
2106.90.94

Description

Base Rate

In bulk or in packages of a weight exceeding 11.34 kg each: Containing
more than 25% by weight of butterfat, not put up for retail sale, over access
commitment
Food preparations of goods of headings 04.01 to 04.04, containing more
than 10% but less than 50% on a dry weight basis of milk solids: Ice cream
mixes or ice milk mixes, over access commitment
Food preparations of goods of headings 04.01 to 04.04, containing more
than 10% but less than 50% on a dry weight basis of milk solids: Other, not
put up for retail sale, over access commitment
Food preparations of goods of headings 04.01 to 04.04, containing 50% or
more on a dry weight basis of milk solids: Ice cream mixes or ice milk
mixes, over access commitment
Food preparations of goods of headings 04.01 to 04.04, containing 50% or
more on a dry weight basis of milk solids: Other, not put up for retail sale,
over access commitment
Other: Over access commitment
Milk, cream or butter substitutes and preparations suitable for use as butter
substitutes: Milk, cream or butter substitutes, containing 50% or more by
weight of dairy content, over access commitment
Milk, cream or butter substitutes and preparations suitable for use as butter
substitutes: Preparations, containing more than 15% by weight of milk fat
but less than 50% by weight of dairy content, suitable for use as butter
substitutes, over access commitment
Egg preparations: Over access commitment
Other: Containing 50% or more by weight of dairy content, over access

253

244% but not less than
$2.83/kg

Staging
Category
E

Note
SSG

267.5% but not less than
$1.16/kg

E

SSG

250.5% but not less than
$2.91/kg

E

SSG

267.5% but not less than
$1.16/kg

E

SSG

250.5% but not less than
$2.91/kg

E

SSG

277% but not less than
$1.16/kg
212% but not less than
$2.11/kg

E

SSG

E

SSG

212% but not less than
$2.11/kg

E

SSG

$1.45/kg
274.5% but not less than

E
E

SSG
SSG

Tariff
Item
2202.90.43
2309.90.32

3502.11.20
3502.19.20
8702.10.10
8702.10.20
8702.90.10
8702.90.20
8703.21.90
8703.22.00
8703.23.00
8703.24.00
8703.31.00
8703.32.00
8703.33.00
8703.90.00
8704.21.90
8704.22.00
8704.23.00

Description

Base Rate

Staging
Category

Note

E

SSG

commitment
Beverages containing milk: Other, containing 50% or more by weight of
dairy content, not put up for retail sale, over access commitment

$2.88/kg
256% but not less than
$36.67/hl

Complete feeds and feed supplements, including concentrates: Containing
50% or more by weight in the dry state of non-fat milk solids, over access
commitment
Over access commitment
Over access commitment
For the transport of 16 or more persons, including the driver
For the transport of ten to 15 persons, including the driver
For the transport of 16 or more persons, including the driver
For the transport of ten to 15 persons, including the driver
Other
Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,000 cc but not exceeding 1,500 cc
Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but not exceeding 3,000 cc
Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 3,000 cc
Of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 1,500 cc
Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but not exceeding 2,500 cc
Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 2,500 cc
Other
Other
g.v.w. exceeding 5 tonnes but not exceeding 20 tonnes
g.v.w. exceeding 20 tonnes

205.5% but not less than
$1.64/kg

E

SSG

$6.12/kg
$1.52/kg
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%
6.1%

E
E
C
C
C
C
C
D
D
D
D
D
D
C
B
B
B

SSG
SSG

254

Tariff
Item
8704.31.00
8704.32.00
8901.10.10
8901.10.90
8901.30.00
8901.90.10
8901.90.91
8901.90.99
8904.00.00
8905.20.19
8905.20.20
8905.90.19
8905.90.90
8906.90.19
8906.90.91
8906.90.99

6.1%
6.1%
25%
25%
25%
15%
25%

Staging
Category
B
B
D
D
B
B
B

25%
25%
20%
25%
20%
25%
15%
25%

B
D
B
B
B
B
B
B

25%

B

Description

Base Rate

g.v.w. not exceeding 5 tonnes
g.v.w. exceeding 5 tonnes
Of dimensions exceeding a length of 294.13 m and a beam of 32.31 m
Other
Refrigerated vessels, other than those of subheading 8901.20
Open vessels
Other: Of dimensions exceeding a length of 294.13 m and a beam of 32.31
m
Other: Other
Tugs and pusher craft.
Drilling platforms: Other
Production platforms
Drill-ships, drilling barges and floating drilling rigs: Other
Other
Open vessels: Other
Other: Of dimensions exceeding a length of 294.13 m and a beam of 32.31
m
Other: Other

255

Note

Tariff Schedule of the European Union

0105 11 91
0105 11 99
0105 94 00

---- Laying stocks
---- Other
-- Fowls of the species Gallus domesticus

52 €/1 000 p/st
52 €/1 000 p/st
20.9 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
E
E
E

0105 99 30

--- Turkeys

23.8 €/100 kg/net

E

0201 10 00

- Carcases and half-carcases

12.8 + 176.8 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 176.8 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 141.4 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 212.2 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 265.2 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 303.4 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 176.8 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 176.8 €/100
kg/net

E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

0201 20 20

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

-- ‘Compensated’ quarters

0201 20 30

-- Unseparated or separated forequarters

0201 20 50

-- Unseparated or separated hindquarters

0201 20 90

-- Other

0201 30 00

- Boneless

0202 10 00

- Carcases and half-carcases

0202 20 10

-- ‘Compensated’ quarters

256

Base Rate

Note

TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB2, TQB3
E
TQB2, TQB3

Tariff Item (CN2015)
0202 20 30

CN2015 Description (see note 1)
-- Unseparated or separated forequarters

0202 20 50

-- Unseparated or separated hindquarters

0202 20 90

-- Other

0202 30 10

-- Forequarters, whole or cut into a maximum of
five pieces, each quarter being in a single block;
‘compensated’ quarters in two blocks, one of which
contains the forequarter, whole or cut into a
maximum of five pieces, and the other, the
hindquarter, excluding the tenderloin, in one piece

Base Rate
12.8 + 141.4 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 221.1 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 265.3 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 221.1 €/100
kg/net

Staging
Category
E

Note
TQB2, TQB3

E
TQB2, TQB3
E
TQB2, TQB3
E

TQB2, TQB3
0202 30 50

-- Crop, chuck-and-blade and brisket cuts

0202 30 90

-- Other

0203 12 11

---- Hams and cuts thereof

12.8 + 221.1 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 304.1 €/100
kg/net
77.8 €/100 kg/net

E
TQB2, TQB3
E
TQB2, TQB3
E
TQP

0203 12 19

60.1 €/100 kg/net

---- Shoulders and cuts thereof

E
TQP

257

Tariff Item (CN2015)
0203 19 11

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate
60.1 €/100 kg/net

---- Fore-ends and cuts thereof

Staging
Category
E

Note
TQP

0203 19 13

---- Loins and cuts thereof, with bone in

86.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0203 19 15

---- Bellies (streaky) and cuts thereof

46.7 €/100 kg/net

E

0203 19 55

----- Boneless

86.9 €/100 kg/net

E

TQP
TQP
TQP
0203 19 59

----- Other

86.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0203 22 11

---- Hams and cuts thereof

77.8 €/100 kg/net

E

TQP
TQP
0203 22 19

60.1 €/100 kg/net

---- Shoulders and cuts thereof

E
TQP

0203 29 11

---- Fore-ends and cuts thereof

60.1 €/100 kg/net

E

0203 29 13

---- Loins and cuts thereof, with bone in

86.9 €/100 kg/net

E

TQP
TQP
0203 29 15

---- Bellies (streaky) and cuts thereof

46.7 €/100 kg/net

E

0203 29 55

----- Boneless

86.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0203 29 59

----- Other

86.9 €/100 kg/net

E

TQP
TQP
TQP

258

Tariff Item (CN2015)
0205 00 80
0206 10 95

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Staging
Category
B
E

0206 29 91

---- Thick skirt and thin skirt

0206 80 91

--- Of horses, asses, mules and hinnies

5.1
12.8 + 303.4 €/100
kg/net
12.8 + 304.1 €/100
kg/net
6.4

0206 90 91

--- Of horses, asses, mules and hinnies

6.4

B

0207 11 10

--- Plucked and gutted, with heads and feet, known
as ‘83% chickens’
--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but
with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘70% chickens’

26.2 €/100 kg/net

E

29.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 11 90

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet and
without necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘65% chickens’, or otherwise presented

32.5 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 12 10

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but
with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘70% chickens’

29.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 11 30

- Frozen
--- Thick skirt and thin skirt

Base Rate

259

Note

TQB1, TQB3
E
TQB2, TQB3
B

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

0207 12 90

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet and
without necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘65% chickens’, or otherwise presented

32.5 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
E

0207 13 10

---- Boneless

102.4 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 20

----- Halves or quarters

35.8 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 30

----- Whole wings, with or without tips

26.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 40

18.7 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 50

----- Backs, necks, backs with necks attached,
rumps and wing-tips
----- Breasts and cuts thereof

60.2 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 60

----- Legs and cuts thereof

46.3 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 70

----- Other

100.8 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 13 91
0207 13 99

---- Livers
---- Other

6.4
18.7 €/100 kg/net

E
E

0207 14 10

---- Boneless

102.4 €/100 kg/net

E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

260

Note

0207 14 20

----- Halves or quarters

35.8 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
E

0207 14 30

----- Whole wings, with or without tips

26.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 14 40

18.7 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 14 50

----- Backs, necks, backs with necks attached,
rumps and wing-tips
----- Breasts and cuts thereof

60.2 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 14 60

----- Legs and cuts thereof

46.3 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 14 70

----- Other

100.8 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 14 91
0207 14 99

---- Livers
---- Other

6.4
18.7 €/100 kg/net

E
E

0207 24 10

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but
with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘80% turkeys’

34 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 24 90

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet and
without necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘73% turkeys’, or otherwise presented

37.3 €/100 kg/net

E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

261

Base Rate

Note

34 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
E

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet and
without necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘73% turkeys’, or otherwise presented

37.3 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 26 10

---- Boneless

85.1 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 26 20
0207 26 30

----- Halves or quarters
----- Whole wings, with or without tips

41 €/100 kg/net
26.9 €/100 kg/net

E
E

0207 26 40

18.7 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 26 50

----- Backs, necks, backs with necks attached,
rumps and wing-tips
----- Breasts and cuts thereof

67.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 26 60

------ Drumsticks and cuts of drumsticks

25.5 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 26 70
0207 26 80
0207 26 91

------ Other
----- Other
---- Livers

46 €/100 kg/net
83 €/100 kg/net
6.4

E
E
E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

0207 25 10

--- Plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but
with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as
‘80% turkeys’

0207 25 90

262

Base Rate

Note

0207 26 99

---- Other

18.7 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
E

0207 27 10

---- Boneless

85.1 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 27 20
0207 27 30

----- Halves or quarters
----- Whole wings, with or without tips

41 €/100 kg/net
26.9 €/100 kg/net

E
E

0207 27 40

18.7 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 27 50

----- Backs, necks, backs with necks attached,
rumps and wing-tips
----- Breasts and cuts thereof

67.9 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 27 60

------ Drumsticks and cuts thereof

25.5 €/100 kg/net

E

0207 27 70
0207 27 80
0207 27 91
0207 27 99

------ Other
----- Other
---- Livers
---- Other

46 €/100 kg/net
83 €/100 kg/net
6.4
18.7 €/100 kg/net

E
E
E
E

0210 11 11

----- Hams and cuts thereof

77.8 €/100 kg/net

E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

Note

TQP
0210 11 19

----- Shoulders and cuts thereof

60.1 €/100 kg/net

E

0210 11 31

----- Hams and cuts thereof

151.2 €/100 kg/net

E

TQP
TQP

263

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

Staging
Category
E
E

0210 20 90

-- Boneless

0210 92 91
0210 92 92
0210 92 99

---- Meat
---- Offal
---- Edible flours and meals of meat or meat offal

0210 99 10

---- Of horses, salted, in brine or dried

119 €/100 kg/net
15.4 + 265.2 €/100
kg/net
15.4 + 303.4 €/100
kg/net
130 €/100 kg/net
15.4
15.4 + 303.4 €/100
kg/net
6.4

0210 99 21

----- With bone in

222.7 €/100 kg/net

D

0210 99 29

----- Boneless

311.8 €/100 kg/net

D

0210 99 31
0210 99 39
0210 99 51

---- Of reindeer
---- Other
----- Thick skirt and thin skirt

15.4
130 €/100 kg/net
15.4 + 303.4 €/100
kg/net
12.8
6.4
15.4
15.4 + 303.4 €/100
kg/net

B
B
E

0210 11 39
0210 20 10

0210 99 59
0210 99 79
0210 99 85
0210 99 90

----- Shoulders and cuts thereof
-- With bone in

----- Other
------ Other
----- Other
--- Edible flours and meals of meat or meat offal

264

Note
TQP
TQB2, TQB3

E
TQB2, TQB3
B
B
D
B

E
B
B
D

TQB2, TQB3
TQB2, TQB3

Tariff Item (CN2015)
0304 71 90
0304 79 10

CN2015 Description (see note 1)
--- Other
--- Fish of the species Boreogadus saida

Base Rate
7.5
7.5

Staging
Category
D
D

Note
TQCod
TQCod

0305 43 00

-- Trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss,
Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita,
Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and
Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)

14

D

ex 0305 72 00 (see note 2)
ex 0305 79 00 (see note 2)
0306 12 05

-- Fish heads, tails and maws
-- Other
--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

13
13
20

D
D
C

0306 12 10
0306 12 90
0306 14 05

---- Whole
---- Other
--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

6
16
8

B
B
D

0306 14 90

---- Other

7.5

B

265

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

ex 0306 16 10 (see note 3)

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

Staging
Category
D

ex 0306 17 10 (see note 3)

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

D

0306 22 30

---- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

C

0306 24 10

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

8

D

ex 0306 26 10 (see note 3)

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

D

Tariff Item (CN2015)

Note

TQShrimps

TQShrimps

TQShrimps
ex 0306 27 10 (see note 3)

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

D

TQShrimps

266

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

0307 19 10

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

Staging
Category
C

0307 29 05

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

C

0307 39 05

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

D

0307 49 05

--- Smoked, whether or not cooked before or during
the smoking process, not otherwise prepared

20

C

0307 59 05

--- Smoked, whether or not cooked before or during
the smoking process, not otherwise prepared

20

C

0307 60 10

-- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

C

Tariff Item (CN2015)

267

Note

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

0307 79 10

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

Staging
Category
C

0307 89 10

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

C

0307 99 10

--- Smoked, whether in shell or not, whether or not
cooked before or during the smoking process, not
otherwise prepared

20

C

0407 11 00

-- Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus

35 €/1 000 p/st

E

0407 19 19
0407 21 00

---- Other
-- Of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus

35 €/1 000 p/st
30.4 €/100 kg/net

E
E

0407 29 10

30.4 €/100 kg/net

E

0407 90 10

--- Of poultry, other than of fowls of the species
Gallus domesticus
-- Of poultry

30.4 €/100 kg/net

E

0408 11 80

--- Other

142.3 €/100 kg/net

E

0408 19 81

---- Liquid

62 €/100 kg/net

E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

268

Note

0408 19 89

---- Other, including frozen

66.3 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
E

0408 91 80

--- Other

137.4 €/100 kg/net

E

0408 99 80

--- Other

35.3 €/100 kg/net

E

0702 00 00

Tomatoes, fresh or chilled

AV0+EP

0707 00 05

- Cucumbers

0709 91 00

-- Globe artichokes

See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

269

Base Rate

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

Note

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

0709 93 10

--- Courgettes

0710 40 00

- Sweetcorn

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
5.1 + 9.4 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

Note

D
TQSC

0805 10 20

-- Sweet oranges, fresh

0805 20 10

-- Clementines

0805 20 30

-- Monreales and satsumas

See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

270

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

0805 20 50

-- Mandarins and wilkings

0805 20 70

-- Tangerines

0805 20 90

-- Other

0805 50 10

-- Lemons (Citrus limon, Citrus limonum)

271

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

Note

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

0806 10 10

-- Table grapes

0808 10 80

-- Other

0808 30 90

-- Other

0809 10 00

- Apricots

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

272

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

Note

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

0809 21 00

-- Sour cherries (Prunus cerasus)

0809 29 00

-- Other

0809 30 10

-- Nectarines

0809 30 90

-- Other

273

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

Note

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

0809 40 05

-- Plums

1001 11 00
1001 19 00
1001 91 90
1001 99 00
1002 10 00
1002 90 00
1003 90 00
1004 10 00
1004 90 00
1108 11 00
1108 12 00
1108 13 00
1108 14 00
1108 19 10
1108 19 90
1604 14 21
1604 14 26
1604 14 28
1604 14 31

-- Seed
-- Other
--- Other
-- Other
- Seed
- Other
- Other
- Seed
- Other
-- Wheat starch
-- Maize (corn) starch
-- Potato starch
-- Manioc (cassava) starch
--- Rice starch
--- Other
----- In vegetable oil
------ Fillets known as ‘loins’
------ Other
----- In vegetable oil

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
148 €/t
148 €/t
95 €/t
95 €/t
93 €/t
93 €/t
93 €/t
89 €/t
89 €/t
224 €/t
166 €/t
166 €/t
166 €/t
216 €/t
166 €/t
24
24
24
24

274

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D

Note

TQCW
TQCW

Tariff Item (CN2015)
1604 14 36
1604 14 38
1604 14 41
1604 14 46
1604 14 48
1604 14 90
1604 20 70
1605 10 00
1605 21 90
1605 29 00
1605 30 90
1605 51 00
1605 52 00
1605 53 10
1605 53 90
1605 54 00
1605 55 00
1605 56 00
1605 57 00
1605 58 00
1605 59 00
1701 12 10

CN2015 Description (see note 1)
------ Fillets known as ‘loins’
------ Other
----- In vegetable oil
------ Fillets known as ‘loins’
------ Other
--- Bonito (Sarda spp.)
--- Of tuna, skipjack or other fish of the genus
Euthynnus
- Crab
--- Other
-- Other
-- Other
-- Oysters
-- Scallops, including queen scallops
--- In airtight containers
--- Other
-- Cuttlefish and squid
-- Octopus
-- Clams, cockles and arkshells
-- Abalone
-- Snails, other than sea snails
-- Other
--- For refining

275

24
24
24
24
24
25
24

Staging
Category
D
D
D
D
D
D
D

8
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
33.9 €/100 kg/net

D
D
D
C
C
C
D
D
C
C
C
C
C
C
D

Base Rate

Note

TQShrimps
TQShrimps

1701 12 90

--- Other

41.9 €/100 kg/net

Staging
Category
D

1701 13 10

--- For refining

33.9 €/100 kg/net

D

1701 13 90

--- Other

41.9 €/100 kg/net

D

1701 14 10

--- For refining

33.9 €/100 kg/net

D

1701 14 90

--- Other

41.9 €/100 kg/net

D

1701 91 00

-- Containing added flavouring or colouring matter

41.9 €/100 kg/net

D

1701 99 10

--- White sugar

41.9 €/100 kg/net

D

1701 99 90

--- Other

41.9 €/100 kg/net

D

2005 80 00

- Sweetcorn (Zea mays var.saccharata)

5.1 + 9.4 €/100 kg/net

E

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

Base Rate

Note

TQSC
2009 61 10

--- Of a value exceeding € 18 per 100 kg net weight

276

See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

AV0+EP

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

2009 69 19

---- Other

2009 69 51

----- Concentrated

2009 69 59

----- Other

2204 30 92

---- Concentrated

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)

277

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

Note

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

2204 30 94

---- Other

2204 30 96

---- Concentrated

2204 30 98

---- Other

8702 10 11
8702 10 19
8702 10 91
8702 10 99
8702 90 11
8702 90 19
8702 90 31
8702 90 39

--- New
--- Used
--- New
--- Used
---- New
---- Used
---- New
---- Used

Base Rate
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
See Annex 2 of
Commission
Implementing
Regulation (EU) No
1101/2014 (p. 679718)
16
16
10
10
16
16
10
10

278

Staging
Category
AV0+EP

AV0+EP

AV0+EP

C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C

Note

8702 90 90
8703 21 10
8703 22 10
8703 22 90
8703 23 11
8703 23 19
8703 23 90
8703 24 10
8703 24 90
8703 31 10
8703 31 90
8703 32 11
8703 32 19
8703 32 90
8703 33 11
8703 33 19
8703 33 90
8703 90 10
8703 90 90
8704 21 10

-- With other engines
--- New
--- New
--- Used
---- Motor caravans
---- Other
--- Used
--- New
--- Used
--- New
--- Used
---- Motor caravans
---- Other
--- Used
---- Motor caravans
---- Other
--- Used
-- With electric motors
-- Other
--- Specially designed for the transport of highly
radioactive materials (Euratom)

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
3.5

Staging
Category
C
C
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
C
C
B

8704 21 31
8704 21 39

----- New
----- Used

22
22

B
B

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

279

Base Rate

Note

8704 21 91
8704 21 99
8704 22 10

----- New
----- Used
--- Specially designed for the transport of highly
radioactive materials (Euratom)

10
10
3.5

Staging
Category
B
B
B

8704 22 91
8704 22 99
8704 23 10

---- New
---- Used
--- Specially designed for the transport of highly
radioactive materials (Euratom)

22
22
3.5

B
B
B

8704 23 91
8704 23 99
8704 31 10

---- New
---- Used
--- Specially designed for the transport of highly
radioactive materials (Euratom)

22
22
3.5

B
B
B

8704 31 31
8704 31 39
8704 31 91
8704 31 99
8704 32 10

----- New
----- Used
----- New
----- Used
--- Specially designed for the transport of highly
radioactive materials (Euratom)

22
22
10
10
3.5

B
B
B
B
B

8704 32 91
8704 32 99

---- New
---- Used

22
22

B
B

Tariff Item (CN2015)

CN2015 Description (see note 1)

280

Base Rate

Note

Tariff Item (CN2015)
Note 1:
Note 2:
Note 3:

Staging
Note
Category
the scope of products in this list being determined by CN codes as they exist in Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) No 1101/2014
ex 0305 72 00 and ex 0305 79 00 - only of trout as specified in CN code 0305 43 00
ex 0306 16 10, ex 0306 17 10, ex 0306 26 10 and ex 0306 27 10 - excluding in immediate packings of a net content
not exceeding 2 kg
CN2015 Description (see note 1)

281

Base Rate

ANNEX 2-B
Declaration of the Parties concerning tariff rate quota administration
SECTION A
Declaration concerning European Union administration for beef and veal, and pork
tariff rate quotas under this Agreement
1.

The general principle is that tariff rate quota administration should be as conducive to
trade as possible. More specifically, it must not impair or nullify the market access
commitments negotiated by the Parties; it must be transparent, predictable, minimise
transactional costs for traders, maximise fill rates and aim to avoid potential speculation.
Structure of the import licensing system
Quarterly sub-periods with carryover between periods for unused tariff rate quota
quantities

2.

In each of the four quarters of the marketing year, 25 per cent of the annual tariff rate
quota quantity will be made available for licence applications.

3.

Any quantities remaining available at the end of one quarter will be automatically rolled
over into the subsequent quarter until the end of the marketing year.
Application period for import licences

4.

An application for an import licence will be accepted up to 45 calendar days preceding
the beginning of each quarter and an import licence shall be issued no less than 30
calendar days before the quarter begins.

5.

If demand for licences during the application period exceeds the quantities available for
that quarter, licences will be allocated on a pro-rated basis.

6.

If the available quantity for any quarter is not fully allocated during the application
period, the remaining quantity will be made available for eligible applicants to apply for
on demand for the rest of that quarter. Import licences will be issued automatically on
demand until the available quantity has been fully subscribed for that period.
Validity of licences

7.

8.

An import licence is valid:
(a)

from the date of issue or the date of the beginning of the quarter for which the
import licence is issued, whichever is later; and

(b)

for five months from the applicable date in subparagraph (a) or until the end of the
marketing year, whichever comes first.

Import licences may be used at any European Union customs entry point and for
multiple shipments.
Eligibility criteria

282

9.

The eligibility criteria and allocation method should result in the quotas going to those
persons that are most likely to use it and must not create barriers to imports.

10.

During the application period, eligible applicants shall include historical importers of
beef, bison or veal for beef and veal imports and historical importers of beef, bison, veal
or pork for pork imports.

11.

In any quarter following the application period when licences are made available on
demand, the eligibility criteria for applicants will be expanded to include wholesalers
and accredited meat processors.
Securities
Securities tied to import licence applications

12.

A security of not more than 95 euro (€) per tonne of beef and 65 euro (€) per tonne of
pork will be lodged with the application for a licence.
Transfer of licence and corresponding security

13.

Licences are not transferable.
Return of licence and corresponding security

14.

Unused licence quantities may be returned before expiration and up to four months prior
to the end of the marketing year. Each licence holder may return up to 30 per cent of
their individual licence quantity. When such a quantity is returned, 60 per cent of the
corresponding security is released.

15.

All returned quantities will be immediately made available to other eligible applicants to
apply for on demand for the rest of that quarter, and will be rolled over to subsequent
quarters if not requested.
Release of security and release of full security when 95 per cent of imports occur

16.

Securities shall be proportionally released each time actual imports have taken place.

17.

Once 95 per cent of an importer’s individual licence quantity is actually imported the
full security shall be released.

283

SECTION B
Declaration concerning Canada’s administration for cheese tariff rate quotas under this
Agreement
1.

The general principle is that tariff rate quota administration should be as conducive
to trade as possible. More specifically, it must not impair or nullify the market access
commitments negotiated by the Parties; it must be transparent, predictable, minimise
transactional costs for traders, maximise fill rates and aim to avoid potential
speculation.

2.

The eligibility criteria and allocation method should result in the quotas going to
those persons that are most likely to use it and must not create barriers to imports.
Structure of the import licensing system

3.

The annual tariff rate quota quantity will be allocated each year among eligible
applicants.

4.

The tariff rate quota allocation method will allow for new entrants each year. During
the phase-in period from Year 1 to Year 5, at least 30 per cent of the tariff rate quota
will be available to new entrants every year. After the end of the phase-in period
from Year 6 and in subsequent years, at least 10 percent of the tariff rate quota
quantity will be available for new entrants.

5.

The tariff rate quota quantity will be allocated on a calendar year basis. Applications
from all interested parties will be received and processed according to the provisions
of the Understanding on Tariff Rate Quota Administration Provisions of Agricultural
Products, as defined in Article 2 of the Agreement on Agriculture, Ministerial
Decision WT/MIN(13)/39, 7 December 2013, with a period of four to six weeks to
submit applications. Imports will be able to start from the first day of the year.

6.

In the event that the tariff rate quota is not fully allocated following the application
process in paragraph 3, available quantities will immediately be offered to eligible
applicants in proportion to their allocation, or on demand if quantities still remain
after the first offer.
Eligibility criteria

7.

To be eligible, an applicant shall be, at a minimum, a resident of Canada and be
active in the Canadian cheese sector regularly during the year.

8.

During the phase-in period from Year 1 to Year 5, a new entrant shall be an eligible
applicant who is not an allocation holder under Canada’s cheese tariff rate quota
under the WTO.

9.

After the end of the phase-in period, from Year 6 and in subsequent years, a new
entrant shall be an eligible applicant who is not an allocation holder under Canada’s
cheese tariff rate quota under the WTO or did not receive an allocation of the tariff
rate quotas under this Agreement in the preceding year.

10.

A new entrant shall be considered as such for a period of three years.

11.

Once an applicant is no longer considered to be a new entrant, the applicant shall be
treated the same as all other applicants.

284

12.

Canada may consider limiting the size of allocations to a specific percentage if it is
deemed necessary to foster a competitive, fair, and balanced import environment.
Use of import allocations and import permits

13.

A tariff rate quota allocation shall be valid for one quota year or, if issued after the
beginning of the quota year, for the remainder of the quota year.

14.

To ensure that imports are aligned with domestic market conditions and to minimise
barriers to trade, an allocation holder will normally be free to use its allocation to
import any product covered by the tariff rate quota at any time during the year.

15.

On the basis of its allocation, an importer will submit an import permit request for
each shipment of product covered by the tariff rate quota that the importer seeks to
import into Canada. Import permits are normally issued automatically upon request
through the electronic permitting system of the Government of Canada. Under
current policies, import permits may be requested up to 30 days before the planned
date of entry and are valid for a period of five days before and 25 days from the date
of entry.

16.

Permits are not transferable.

17.

An import permit may be amended or cancelled.

18.

A transfer of allocations may be authorised.

19.

An allocation holder that uses less than 95 per cent of its allocation in any one year
may be subject to an under-utilisation penalty in the following year, in which it will
receive an allocation that reflects the actual level of use of the previous allocation.
An allocation holder affected by an under-utilisation penalty will be advised prior to
the final allocation of the tariff rate quota.

20.

An allocation holder may return an unused quantity of their allocation up to a
specified date. Returned quantities will be considered used for the purpose of the
application of the under-utilisation penalty. Chronic returns may be penalised.

21.

Returned quantities will normally be made available to interested allocation holders
who have not returned any unused quantity of their allocation the day after the return
deadline. If quantities remain after that, they may be offered to other interested third
parties.

22.

The return deadline will be set at a date that is early enough to give sufficient time
for use of the returned quantities, while being late enough to allow allocation holders
to establish their import needs until the end of the year, possibly near the middle of
the quota year.

285

ANNEX 4-A
COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS
Article 1
Objectives and purpose
1.

The Parties note the cooperation between Canada and the European Commission in
the area of science and technology.

2.

The Parties affirm their joint commitment to improve vehicle safety and
environmental performance, and to the harmonisation efforts pursued under the
framework of the 1998 Global Agreement administered by the World Forum for the
Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations (WP.29) (the “1998 Global Agreement”) of
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UNECE”).

3.

The Parties note their commitment to enhance their efforts in the area of regulatory
cooperation under this Chapter and Chapter Twenty-One (Regulatory Cooperation).

4.

The Parties recognise the right of each Party to determine its desired level of health,
safety, and environmental and consumer protection.

5.

The Parties desire to enhance cooperation and to increase the efficient use of
resources in matters that relate to motor vehicle technical regulations, in a manner
that does not compromise each Party’s ability to fulfill its responsibilities.

6.

The purpose of this Annex is to strengthen cooperation and communication,
including the exchange of information, on motor vehicle safety and environmental
performance research activities related to the development of new technical
regulations or related standards, to promote the application and recognition of the
Global Technical Regulations under the framework of the 1998 Global Agreement
and possible future harmonisation, between the Parties, concerning improvements
and other developments in the areas of motor vehicle technical regulations or related
standards.
Article 2
Areas of cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to share information and cooperate on activities in the following
areas:
(a)

the development and establishment of technical regulations or related standards;

(b)

the post-implementation reviews of technical regulations or related standards;

(c)

the development and dissemination of information for consumer use related to motor
vehicle regulations or related standards;

(d)

the exchange of research, information and results linked to the development of new
vehicle safety regulations or related standards, and advanced emission reduction and
electric vehicle technologies; and

286

(e)

the exchange of available information on the identification of safety-related or
emission-related defects and non-compliance with technical regulations.
Article 3
Forms of cooperation

The Parties shall endeavour to maintain an open and ongoing dialogue in the area of motor
vehicle technical regulations or related standards. To this end, the Parties shall endeavour to:
(a)

meet at least annually (including meetings held on the margins of WP.29 Sessions),
by video-conference or, if directly, on an alternating basis in Canada and in the
European Union;

(b)

share information about domestic and international programmes and agendas,
including planning of research programmes linked to the development of new
technical regulations or related standards;

(c)

contribute jointly to encourage and promote greater international harmonisation of
technical requirements through multilateral fora, such as the 1998 Global Agreement,
including through cooperation in the planning of initiatives in support of such
activities;

(d)

share and discuss research and development plans on motor vehicle safety and
environmental technical regulations or related standards;

(e)

conduct joint analyses, develop methodologies and approaches, as mutually
beneficial, practical and convenient, to assist and facilitate the development of motor
vehicle technical regulations or related standards; and

(f)

develop additional provisions for cooperation.
Article 4
Canada’s incorporation of United Nations Regulations

1.

The Parties acknowledge that Canada has incorporated, with the adaptations that it
considered necessary, technical regulations contained in United Nations Regulations
into its Motor Vehicle Safety Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1038, as listed in Annex 4-A-1.

2.

Canada maintains its right to modify its law, including by amending or revising
which United Nations Regulations are incorporated into its law, or the manner in
which or the extent to which these Regulations are incorporated into its law. Before
introducing such changes, Canada shall inform the European Union and, upon
request, shall be prepared to provide information on the rationale for these changes.
Canada shall continue to recognise the relevant United Nations Regulations, unless
doing so would provide for a lower level of safety than the amendments introduced,
or would compromise North American integration.

3.

The Parties shall engage in technical consultations with a view to determining, no
later than three years after the entry into force of this Agreement, whether the
technical regulations contained in the United Nations Regulations, listed in Annex 4A-2, should also be incorporated into Canada’s Motor Vehicle Safety Regulations,
with any adaptations Canada considers necessary. These technical regulations should

287

be incorporated, unless doing so would provide for a lower level of safety than the
Canadian regulations or would compromise North American integration.
4.

The Parties shall also engage in further technical consultations to determine whether
other technical regulations should be included in Annex 4-A-2.

5.

Canada shall establish and maintain a list of technical regulations contained in
United Nations Regulations that are incorporated into Canada’s Motor Vehicle Safety
Regulations. Canada shall make that list publicly available.

6.

In an effort to promote regulatory convergence, the Parties shall exchange
information, to the extent practicable, on their respective technical regulations related
to motor vehicle safety.
Article 5
Positive consideration of the other Party’s technical regulations

When a Party develops a new technical regulation for motor vehicles and their parts, or when
it modifies an existing one, it shall consider the technical regulations of the other Party,
including those established under the framework of the UNECE World Forum for the
Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations (WP.29). A Party shall provide, at the request of the
other Party, an explanation on the extent to which it considered the technical regulations of
that other Party when it developed its new technical regulations.
Article 6
Cooperation with the United States of America
The Parties recognise their mutual interest to cooperate with the United States of America in
the field of motor vehicle technical regulations. If the European Union and the United States
conclude an agreement or an arrangement on the harmonisation of their respective technical
regulations related to motor vehicles, the Parties shall cooperate with a view to determining
whether they should conclude a similar agreement or arrangement.
ANNEX 4-A-1
List referred to in Article 4.1 of Annex 4-A
United
Nations
Regulation

No. 98

Title of United Nations Regulation

Canadian
Regulation into
which the United
Nations
Regulation is
incorporated, in
whole or in part

Title of Canadian
Regulation into
which the United
Nations Regulation
is incorporated, in
whole or in part

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor vehicle
headlamps equipped with gasdischarge light sources

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

288

No. 112

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor vehicle
headlamps emitting an
asymmetrical passing-beam or a
driving-beam or both and equipped
with filament lamps and/or LED
modules

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

No. 113

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor vehicle
headlamps emitting a symmetrical
passing-beam or a driving-beam or
both and equipped with filament,
gas-discharge light sources or LED
modules

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

No. 51

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor vehicles having
at least four wheels with regard to
their noise emissions

CMVSS 1106*

Noise Emissions

No. 41

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor cycles with
regard to noise

CMVSS 1106*

Noise Emissions

No. 11

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of vehicles with regard to
door latches and door retention
components

CMVSS 206*

Door Locks and
Door Retention
Components

No.
116 Uniform technical prescriptions
(immobilizer concerning the protection of motor
only)
vehicles against unauthorized use
(Immobilizer only)

CMVSS 114*

Theft Protection
and Rollaway
Prevention

No. 42

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of vehicles with regard to
their front and rear protective
devices (bumpers etc)

CMVSS 215*

Bumpers

No. 78

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of vehicles of categories
L1, L2, L3, L4 and L5 with regard
to braking

CMVSS 122*

Motorcycle Brake
Systems

No. 8

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor vehicles
headlamps emitting an

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

289

asymmetrical passing beam or a
driving beam or both an equipped
with halogen filament lamps
(H1, H2, H3, HB3, HB4, H7, H8,
H9, HIR1, HIR2 and/or H11)
No. 20

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor vehicles
headlamps emitting an
asymmetrical passing beam or a
driving beam or both and equipped
with halogen filament lamps (H4
lamps)

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

No. 31

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of power-driven vehicle's
halogen sealed-beam headlamps
(HSB) emitting an European
asymmetrical passing-beam or a
driving-beam or both

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

No. 57

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of headlamps for motor
cycles and vehicles treated as such

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

No. 72

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of motor cycle headlamps
emitting an asymmetrical passing
beam and a driving beam and
equipped with halogen lamps (HS1
lamps)

CMVSS 108*

Lighting System
and Retroreflective
Devices

No.
13H
(electronic
stability
control only)

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of passenger cars with
regard to braking (electronic
stability control only)

CMVSS 126

Electronic Stability
Control Systems

No. 60

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of two-wheeled motor
cycles and mopeds with regard to
driver-operated controls including
the identification of controls, telltales and indicators

CMVSS 123

Motorcycle
Controls and
Displays

No. 81

Uniform provisions concerning the
approval of rear-view mirrors of
two-wheeled power-driven
vehicles with or without side car,

CMVSS 111

Mirrors

290

with regard to the mounting of
rear-view mirrors on handlebars
*As the regulation read on 13 February 2013.
ANNEX 4-A-2
List referred to in Article 4.3 of Annex 4-A
United Nations
Regulation

Title of United Nations Regulation

No. 12

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to
the protection of the driver against the steering mechanism in the event
of impact

No. 17

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to
the seats, their anchorages and any head restraints

No. 43

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of safety glazing materials
and their installation on vehicles

No. 48

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to
the installation of lighting and light-signalling devices

No. 87

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of daytime running lamps
for power-driven vehicles

No. 53

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of category L3 vehicles
with regard to the installation of lighting and light-signalling devices

No. 116

Uniform technical prescriptions concerning the protection of motor
vehicles against unauthorized use

No. 123

Uniform provisions concerning the approval of adaptive front-lighting
systems (AFS) for motor vehicles

291

ANNEX 5-A
COMPETENT AUTHORITIES
Competent authorities of the European Union
1.

Control is shared between the national Services of the Member States and the European
Commission. In this respect, the following applies:
(a)

for exports to Canada, the Member States are responsible for the control of the
production circumstances and requirements, including statutory inspections or audits
and issuing health certification attesting to the agreed SPS measures and
requirements;

(b)

for imports from Canada, the Member States are responsible for the control of the
compliance of the imports with the European Union’s import conditions; and

(c)

the European Commission is responsible for the overall coordination, inspection or
audits of control systems and the necessary measures, including legislative action to
ensure uniform application of standards and requirements of this Agreement.

Competent authorities of Canada
2.

The following are responsible for the application of SPS measures with respect to
domestically produced, exported and imported animals and animal products, plants and
plant products, and for issuing health certificates attesting to the agreed SPS measures
unless otherwise noted:
(a)

the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (the “CFIA”);

(b)

the Department of Health, as appropriate; or

(c)

a successor entity notified to the other Party.

292

ANNEX 5-B
REGIONAL CONDITIONS
Diseases for which regionalisation decisions may be taken:
Diseases
1.

Foot-and-mouth disease

2.

Vesicular stomatitis

3.

Swine vesicular disease

4.

Rinderpest

5.

Peste des petits ruminants

6.

Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia

7.

Lumpy skin disease

8.

Rift Valley fever

9.

Bluetongue

10.

Sheep pox and goat pox

11.

African horse sickness

12.

African swine fever

13.

Classical swine fever

14.

Notifiable avian influenza

15.

Newcastle disease

16.

Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis

17.

Epizootic haemorrhagic disease

Aquatic Diseases
The Parties may discuss the list of aquatic diseases on the basis of the OIE International Aquatic
Animal Health Code.

293

ANNEX 5-C
PROCESS OF RECOGNITION OF REGIONAL CONDITIONS
Animal diseases
To be agreed at a later stage.
Plant pests
To be agreed at a later stage.

294

ANNEX 5-D
GUIDELINES TO DETERMINE, RECOGNISE AND MAINTAIN EQUIVALENCE
Determination and Recognition of Equivalence
To be agreed at a later stage.
Maintenance of Equivalence
1.

2.

If a Party intends to adopt, modify, or repeal an SPS measure in an area for which it has
made a recognition of equivalence as set out in Article 5.6.3(a) or a recognition
described in Article 5.6.3(b), that Party should:
(a)

evaluate whether the adoption, modification or repeal of that SPS measure may
affect the recognition; and

(b)

notify the other Party of its intention to adopt, modify, or repeal that SPS measure,
and of the evaluation under paragraph (a). The notification should take place at an
early appropriate stage, when amendments can still be introduced and comments
taken into account.

If a Party adopts, modifies, or repeals an SPS measure in an area for which it has made a
recognition, the importing Party should continue to accept the recognition of
equivalence as set out in Article 5.6.3(a) or the recognition described in Article 5.6.3(b),
as the case may be, in that area until it has communicated to the exporting Party whether
special conditions must be met, and if so, provided the special conditions to the
exporting Party. The importing Party should consult with the exporting Party to develop
these special conditions.

295

ANNEX 5-E
RECOGNITION OF SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
General Notes
1. If a Party modifies an SPS measure listed in this Annex, the modified SPS measure applies to imports
from the other Party, taking into account paragraph 2 of Annex 5-D. For updated SPS measures, refer to
the legislative publications of each Party.
2. If an importing Party determines that a special condition listed in this Annex is no longer necessary,
that Party shall notify the other Party in accordance with Article 26.5 that it will no longer apply that
special condition to imports from the other Party.
3. For greater certainty, an SPS measure of an importing Party that is not otherwise referenced in this
Annex or a measure of an importing Party that is not an SPS measure applies, as appropriate, to imports
from the other Party.

296

Section A
Sanitary Measures

297

SPS
Area

Exports from Canada to the European Union

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the
European Union

European
Union

Semen

Cattle

298

Special condition(s)

Animal
health

Directive
88/407

- Health of Animals
Act, S.C. 1990, c. 21
- Health of Animals
Regulations, C.R.C.,
c. 296

Semen collection centre
clinically free of
paratuberculosis

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations
- CFIA, Disease
Control Manual of
Procedures, s. 15,
Artificial Insemination
Program

Directive
88/407

1. Enzootic bovine leucosis:
(serum) Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (“ELISA”)
In addition, when possible, the
uterine dam of the prospective donor
bull should be subjected to an ELISA
test for enzootic bovine leucosis,
subsequent to the weaning of the
prospective donor, with negative
results.
This test of the uterine dam is
required to export semen to the
Member States of the European
Union when semen is collected from
a donor bull before reaching 24
months of age, and a negative result
to an ELISA test is required after
reaching that age. This test is not
required when the prospective donor
bull originates from a Canada Health
Accredited Herd for Enzootic bovine
leucosis; and,

2. Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis:
(serum) ELISA
The semi-annual testing for infectious
bovine rhinotracheitis of all resident
animals must be performed at
infectious bovine rhinotracheitisnegative facilities that are approved
for export to the European Union.
Only infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis-negative facilities are
allowed to export semen to the
European Union.

299

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

Special condition(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European Union

European
Union

Embryos

In vivo derived bovine
Animal
health

Directive

- Health of Animals Act

89/556

- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part XIII

- Health of Animals
Act - Health of
Animals Regulations

Directive

- CFIA Embryo
Export Approval
Program

Decisions

89/556

2006/168
2007/240

1. The donor females spent the six
months immediately prior to the
collection within Canada in no more
than two herds:
(a) which, according to official
findings, were free from
tuberculosis;
(b) which, according to official
findings, were free from

300

brucellosis;
(c) which were free from
enzootic bovine leucosis or in
which no animal showed
clinical signs of enzootic
bovine leucosis during the
previous three years; and
(d) in which no bovine animal
showed clinical signs of
infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis/infectious
pustular vulvovaginitis during
the previous 12 months;

2. There was no outbreak of
epizootic haemorrhagic disease
within 10 kilometers of where the
donor female is located during the 30
days prior to collection; and,

3. The semen is collected and stored
in collection centres or stored in
storage centres approved by the
CFIA, or the semen is collected and
stored in collection centres or stored
in storage centres approved by the
competent authority of a third
country that is approved to export
semen to the European Union, or the
semen is exported from European
Union.

301

Exports from the European Union to Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS
Area

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European Union

European
Union

Fresh meat

Ruminants, equidae, porcine, poultry, farmed game from deer, rabbit and ratite
Public
health

Regulations
852/2004
853/2004
854/2004
2073/2005
2015/1375

- Meat Inspection Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. 25 (1st
Supp.)
- Meat Inspection
Regulations, 1990,
S.O.R./90-288
- Food and Drugs Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27
- Food and Drugs
Regulations, C.R.C., c.

1. Compliance with
Canadian rules on
transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy;

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

2. Prolonged delayed
evisceration not permitted;

- Food and Drugs Act

3. Compliance with
microbiological food safety
criteria of the importing
Party;

302

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004
2073/2005
2015/1375

See Appendix A

8

4. Porcine meat intended
for processing in ready-toeat product is tested or
frozen in accordance with
the Commission Regulation
(EC) No 2015/1375;
5. Blood is collected using
a closed blood collection
method; and,
6. Meat derived from
animals slaughtered under
emergency slaughter
procedures is not eligible
for trade.

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

SPS measure(s)
of the
European Union

European
Union

303

Special condition(s)

Meat products

Ruminants, equidae, pigs, poultry and farmed game
Public
Health

Regulation

- Meat Inspection Act

852/2004

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004
2073/2005

- Food and Drugs Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

1. Fresh meat used to make
the products complies with
applicable special
conditions, excluding
special condition 4 when
the finished product is
treated by heat to a
temperature sufficient to
destroy Trichinella;

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

- Food and Drugs Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004
2073/2005

1. Fresh meat used to make the
products complies with applicable
special conditions, excluding
Appendix A special condition 6(a)
when the finished product is treated
by heat to a temperature sufficient to
destroy Trichinella;
2. Compliance with product standards
of the importing Party; and,

2. Compliance with product
standards of the importing
Party; and,

3. Compliance with microbiological
food safety criteria of the importing
Party.

3. Compliance with
microbiological food safety
criteria of the importing
Party.

Minced meat, meat preparations

Ruminants, equidae, pigs, poultry and farmed game
Public
Health

Regulations
852/2004
853/2004

- Meat Inspection
Act
- Meat Inspection

1. Fresh meat used to make
the products complies with
applicable special conditions;
2. Compliance with product

304

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

(i) Fresh meat used to make the
products complies with applicable
special conditions;

853/2004

(ii) Compliance with product

854/2004

Regulations

2073/2005

- Food and Drugs
Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

standards of the importing
Party; and,
3. Compliance with
microbiological food safety
criteria of the importing
Party.

- Food and Drugs Act

854/2004

standards of the importing Party; and,

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

2073/2005

(iii) Compliance with microbiological
food safety criteria of the importing
Party.

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

1. Fresh meat used to make the
products complies with applicable
special conditions, excluding
Appendix A special condition 6(a)
when the finished product is treated
by heat to a temperature sufficient to
destroy Trichinella; and,

Processed animal proteins for human consumption

Ruminants, equidae, pigs, poultry and farmed game
Public
health

Regulation
852/2004
853/2004
854/2004

- Meat Inspection
Act
- Meat Inspection
Regulations
- Food and Drugs
Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

1. Fresh meat used to make
the products complies with
applicable special conditions,
excluding special condition 4
when the finished product is
treated by heat to a
temperature sufficient to
destroy Trichinella; and
2. Compliance with product
standards of the importing
Party.

305

- Food and Drugs Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004

2. Compliance with product standards
of the importing Party.

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European Union

European
Union

Rendered animal fat intended for human consumption

Ruminants, equidae, pigs, poultry and farmed game
Public
health

Regulation
852/2004
853/2004
854/2004

- Meat Inspection
Act
- Meat Inspection
Regulations
- Food and Drugs
Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

1. Fresh meat used to make
the products complies with
applicable special conditions,
excluding special condition 4;
and,

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

2. Compliance with product
standards of the importing
Party.

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

306

- Food and Drugs Act

853/2004
854/2004

1. Fresh meat used to make the
products complies with applicable
special conditions, excluding
Appendix A special condition 6(a);
and,
2. Compliance with product standards
of the importing Party.

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

Special condition(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European Union

European
Union

Animal casings for human consumption

Cattle, sheep, goats and pigs
Public
health

Regulations

- Meat Inspection Act

852/2004

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004

Compliance with Canadian
rules on transmissible
spongiform encephalopathy

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

- Food and Drugs Act

- Food and Drugs Act

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

307

853/2004
854/2004

Compliance with European Union
rules on transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy

Exports from the European Union to Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS
Area

SPS measure(s)
of the

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

European
Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

SPS measure(s)
of the
European Union

Fishery products and live bivalve molluscs

Fish and fishery products for human consumption

308

Special condition(s)

Public
Health

Regulations
852/2004
853/2004
854/2004
2073/2005
2074/2005

- Fish Inspection
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.
F-12
- Fish Inspection
Regulations, C.R.C.,
c. 802
- Food and Drugs
Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

Smoked fish packed in
hermetically sealed containers
that are not frozen contain a
salt level not less than 9 per
cent (water phase method).

The Canadian and European
Union systems are deemed to
provide an equivalent level of
protection with respect to
microbiological requirements.
However, the microbiological
criteria used by Canada and
the European Union for end
product monitoring differ in
some aspects. For exported
products, it is the
responsibility of the exporter
to ensure that the products
meet the food safety criteria
of the importing country.

- Fish Inspection Act

Regulations

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

- Food and Drugs Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004
2073/2005
2074/2005

Deheaded eviscerated fish for human consumption
Animal
Health

Directive
2006/88

- Health of Animals
Act

- Health of Animals
Act

- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part
XVI

- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part XVI

Directive
2006/88
Regulation
1251/2008

- Reportable
Disease Regulations,
S.O.R./91-2
Live bivalve molluscs for human consumption, including echinoderms, tunicates and marine gastropods

309

The Canadian and European Union
systems are deemed to provide an
equivalent level of protection with
respect to microbiological
requirements. However, the
microbiological criteria used by
Canada and the European Union for
end product monitoring differ in
some aspects. For exported products,
it is the responsibility of the exporter
to ensure that the products meet the
food safety criteria of the importing
country.

Public
health

Regulations

- Fish Inspection Act

852/2004

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

853/2004
854/2004
2074/2005

- Food and Drugs
Act
- Food and Drugs
Regulations

The Canadian and European
Union systems are deemed to
provide an equivalent level of
protection with respect to
microbiological requirements.
However, the microbiological
criteria used by Canada and
the European Union for end
product monitoring differ in
some aspects. For exported
products, it is the
responsibility of the exporter
to ensure that the products
meet the food safety criteria
of the importing country.

- Fish Inspection Act

Regulations

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

852/2004

- Management of
Contaminated
Fisheries Regulations,
S.O.R./90-351- Food
and Drugs Act

Live bivalve molluscs are monitored
for diarrheic shellfish poison toxins
on a risk-based level

853/2004
854/2004
2074/2005

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

The Canadian and European Union
systems are deemed to provide an
equivalent level of protection with
respect to microbiological
requirements. However, the
microbiological criteria used by
Canada and the European Union for
end product monitoring differ in
some aspects. For exported products,
it is the responsibility of the exporter
to ensure that the products meet the
food safety criteria of the importing
country.

Fish caught under the authority of a recreational fishing licence from Canada
Public
health

- Fish Inspection Act

Regulations

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

852/2004
853/2004
854/2004

For fish caught under the authority of
a recreational fishing licence from
Canada with the name of the
importer, the following conditions
apply:

2073/2005
1. The fish was caught in Canadian
fisheries waters on the dates while the
licence is valid, in accordance with
Canadian regulations on sport fishing
and that possession limits have been
respected;

310

2. The fish has been eviscerated
under appropriate hygiene and
preservation measures;

3. The fish is not a toxic species nor a
species that may contain biotoxins;
and,

4. The fish is introduced into the
European Union within one month
following the last date of validity of
the recreational fishing licence and is
not intended to be marketed. A copy
of the recreational fishing licence is
attached to the accompanying
document.

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the
European Union

European
Union

311

Special condition(s)

Milk and milk products for human consumption

Pasteurized or cheeses from not pasteurised (or low heat treated) and raw milk maturated for at least 60 days
Public
health

Regulation
852/2004
853/2004
854/2004

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations, s. 34
- Food and Drugs
Act- Food and Drugs
Regulations, Part B,
Division 8
- Canada
Agricultural
Products Act, R.S.C
1985, c. 20 (4th
Supp.)

The Canadian and European
Union systems are deemed to
provide an equivalent level of
protection with respect to
microbiological requirements.
However, the microbiological
criteria used by Canada and
the European Union for end
product monitoring differ in
some aspects. For exported
products, it is the
responsibility of the exporter
to ensure that the products
meet the food safety criteria
of the importing country.

- Dairy Products
Regulations,
S.O.R./79-840

- Food and Drugs Act

Decision

- Food and Drugs
Regulations, Part B,
Division B

2011/163

- Canada Agricultural
Products Act

852/2004

- Dairy Products
Regulations

854/2004

Regulation

853/2004

605/2010

1. Canada to evaluate Hazard
Analysis Critical Control Point
(“HACCP”) systems of
establishments which are not Food
Safety Enhancement Program
(“FSEP”)-HACCP recognized to
ensure they are operating under
HACCP principles; and,

2. Two signatures are required on the
export certificate: animal health
attestations are signed by an official
veterinarian; and public health related
attestations are signed by an official
inspector.

The Canadian and European Union
systems are deemed to provide an
equivalent level of protection with
respect to microbiological
requirements. However, the
microbiological criteria used by
Canada and the European Union for
end product monitoring differ in
some aspects. For exported products,
it is the responsibility of the exporter
to ensure that the products meet the
food safety criteria of the importing
country.

312

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

Animal casings not for human consumption

Pigs
Regulation
1069/2009

of the
European Union

European
Union

Animal
Health

SPS measure(s)

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part IV

313

Special condition(s)

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European Union

European
Union

Bones, horns and hooves (except meals) and their products not for human consumption

Animal
health

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations

314

Regulation
1069/2009

Certificate as per Decision 97/534

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of Canada
Special condition(s)

of the

Blood and blood products not intended for human consumption

Ruminant
Regulation
1069/2009

of the
European Union

European
Union

Animal
health

SPS measure(s)

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part IV
and Part XIV

Compliance with Canadian
rules on transmissible
spongiform encephalopathy

- Feeds Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. F-9
- Feeds Regulations,
1983, S.O.R./83-593

315

Special
condition(s)

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European Union

European
Union

Apiculture products not for human consumption

Animal
Health

Regulation
1069/2009

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part VI

Product subjected to
treatment, for example freeze
drying, irradiation, or vacuum
packaging.

- Health of Animals
Act
- Health of Animals
Regulations
- Bee Products
Directive
TAHD-DSAT-IE2001-3-6, January 5,
2011

316

Regulation
1069/2009

1. Bee products used for animal or
human feed or industrial use are not
restricted; and

2. Bee products used for bee feeding
are treated.

SPS
Area

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the
European Union

European
Union

Wool, feathers and hair

Wool
Animal
health

Regulation
1069/2009

- Health of Animals
Act

Certificate of origin

- Health of Animals
Act

- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part IV

- Health of Animals
Regulations

Pig bristle

317

Regulation
1069/2009

Special condition(s)

Animal
health

Regulation
1069/2009

- Health of Animals
Act

Certificate of origin

- Health of Animals
Act

- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part IV

SPS Area

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

1069/2009

- Health of Animals
Regulations

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

Regulation

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the
European Union

European
Union

Shell eggs and egg products intended for human consumption

318

Special condition(s)

Animal health

Directives
90/539
2002/99

SPS Area

- Health of Animals
Act

1. Statement of origin; and,
2. Veterinary certification

- Health of Animals
Regulations, Part III
and Part IV (for shell
eggs and egg
products)

Exports from the European Union to Canada

SPS
measure(s)

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Egg Products – Import Directives
Procedures, AHPD90/539
DSAE-IE-2001-5-3,
December 20, 1995
2002/99

Exports from Canada to the European Union

SPS measure(s) of
Canada

Special condition(s)

of the

SPS measure(s)
of the

Special condition(s)

European
Union

European
Union

Horizontal issues

Listing of
establishments

Regulation
2004/852
2004/853

- Meat Inspection
Act

Listing required for fresh
meat and meat products

- Meat Inspection

319

- Meat Inspection Act

Regulation

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

2004/852
2004/853

The following conditions apply to all
animals and animal product
commodities with public health
recognition where a list of

2004/854

Regulations

- Fish Inspection Act

- Fish Inspection Act

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

- Canada Agricultural
Products Act

- Canada
Agricultural
Products Act

- Dairy Products
Regulations

- Dairy Products
Regulations

2004/854

establishments is required:

1. Lists of Canadian establishments
and plants are entered into the
TRACES system by Canada; and,

2. Canada provides guarantees that
the establishments fulfil the
conditions as laid down in this
Chapter, in its entirety.

The European Union updates and
publishes the list of establishments
without undue delay.

320

Water

Directive
98/83

- Canada
Agricultural
Products Act

- Canada Agricultural
Products Act
- Dairy Products
Regulations

- Dairy Products
Regulations

- Fish Inspection Act

- Fish Inspection Act

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

- Fish Inspection
Regulations

- Food and Drugs Act

- Food and Drugs
Act

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

- Food and Drugs
Regulations

- Meat Inspection Act

- Meat Inspection
Act

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

- Meat Inspection
Regulations

321

Directive
98/83

APPENDIX A:

SPECIAL CONDITIONS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN EXPORTS FROM CANADA TO THE
EUROPEAN UNION

1. Compliance with European Union rules on transmissible spongiform encephalopathy;
2. Shrouds not to be used on carcases;
3. Compliance with European Union rules on decontamination;
4. Compliance with microbiological testing for export to Finland and Sweden as laid down in the Commission
Regulation (EC) No 1688/2005.
5. Ante-mortem inspection
Routine ante-mortem inspection procedures apply provided a CFIA veterinarian is present on premises
when ante-mortem inspection is conducted on animals intended to be slaughtered for export to the
European Union;
6. Post-mortem inspection
(a) Pork:
in accordance with the Commission Implementing Regulation (EC) No 2015/1375:
(i) skeletal muscle is tested for Trichinella by using a validated digestion method approved by the
CFIA in a CFIA laboratory or a laboratory certified by the CFIA for that purpose; or,
(ii)
CFIA;

skeletal muscle is submitted to cold treatment by using a treatment approved by the

(b) Bovine over 6 weeks old:
(i) liver: incision of the gastric surface and at the base of the caudate lobe to examine the bile
ducts;
(ii) head: two incisions in the external masseters parallel to the mandible;
(c) Domestic solipeds;
in accordance with the Commission Implementing Regulation (EC) No 2015/1375, skeletal
muscle is tested for Trichinella by using a validated digestion method approved by the CFIA in a
CFIA laboratory or a laboratory certified by the CFIA for that purpose;
(d) Farmed game - wild boar:
in accordance with the Commission Implementing Regulation (EC) No 2015/1375, skeletal muscle is tested
for Trichinella by using a validated digestion method approved by the CFIA in a CFIA laboratory or a
laboratory certified by the CFIA for that purpose;
7. Regular check on general hygiene:
in addition to Canadian operational and preoperational sanitation requirements, the products testing
requirements for E. coli and Salmonella for the United States of America (USA) as is written in Annex T:
Testing for Escherichia coli (E. coli) in Slaughter Establishments and Annex U: USDA Performance
Standards for Salmonella of USA section of Chapter 11 of the CFIA’s Meat Hygiene Manual of Procedures
are implemented; and
8. Compliance with microbiological food safety criteria of the importing Party.

322

Section B

Phytosanitary Measures

To be agreed at a later stage.

323

ANNEX-5-F
APPROVAL OF ESTABLISHMENTS OR FACILITIES
The conditions and procedures for the purpose of Article 5.7.4(b) are as follows:
(a)

the import of the product has been authorised, if so required, by the competent authority
of the importing Party;

(b)

the establishment or facility concerned has been approved by the competent authority of
the exporting Party;

(c)

the competent authority of the exporting Party has the authority to suspend or withdraw
the approval of the establishment or facility; and

(d)

the exporting Party has provided relevant information requested by the importing Party.

324

ANNEX 5-G
PROCEDURE RELATED TO SPECIFIC IMPORT REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANT
HEALTH
A key objective of this procedure is that the importing Party establishes and maintains, to the
best of its ability, a list of regulated pests for commodities where a phytosanitary concern exists
in its territory.
1.

If the Parties jointly identify a specific commodity as a priority, the importing Party
should establish a preliminary list of pests for that commodity, within a period of time
determined by the Parties, once it receives from the exporting Party:
(a)

information on the pest status in the territory of the exporting Party that relates to
the pests regulated by at least one of the Parties; and

(b)

information on the pest status of other pests occurring in its territory based on
international databases and other available sources.

2.

The preliminary list of pests of an importing Party may include pests that are already
regulated in its territory. It may also include potential quarantine pests for which the
importing Party may require a pest risk analysis should a commodity be confirmed as a
priority in accordance with paragraph 3.

3.

For a commodity:
(a)

for which a preliminary list of pests has been established pursuant to paragraph 2;

(b)

which the Parties confirm is a priority; and

(c)

for which the exporting Party has provided all relevant information required by
the importing Party,

the importing Party should undertake the steps necessary to establish its regulated pest
list as well as the specific import requirements for that commodity.
4.

If the importing Party provides for more than one phytosanitary measure to meet the
specific import requirements for a specific commodity, the competent authority of the
exporting Party should communicate to the competent authority of the importing Party
which measure or measures it will use as the basis for certification.

325

ANNEX 5-H
PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES TO CONDUCT AN AUDIT OR VERIFICATION
To be agreed at a later stage.

326

ANNEX 5-I
EXPORT CERTIFICATION
Model attestation for health certificates for animals and animal products
1.

Official health certificates shall cover consignments of products being traded between
the Parties.

Health attestations
2.

Equivalence agreed: Model health attestation to be used (equivalence for measures or
certification systems). Refer to Annex 5-E;

“The [insert product] herein described, complies with the relevant [European Union/Canada] (*)
SPS measure(s) and requirement(s) which have been recognised as equivalent to the
[Canada/European Union] (*) SPS measure(s) and requirement(s) as prescribed in Annex 5-E of
the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement [and the special
condition(s) as set out in Annex 5-E](*).
* Delete as appropriate.”
3.

Until certificates on the basis of equivalence have been adopted, existing certification
shall continue to be used.

Official languages for certification
4.

(a)

For import into the European Union, the certificate must be drawn up in at least
one of the official languages of the Member State of the border inspection post of
introduction of the consignment into the European Union; and

(b)

for import into Canada, the certificate must be drawn up in one of the official
languages of Canada.

Means of certification
5.

The exchange of original certificate information may occur by a paper-based system or
a secure method of electronic data transmission that offers an equivalent certification
guarantee. The exporting Party may elect to provide electronic official certification if
the importing Party has determined that equivalent security guarantees are being
provided, including the use of a digital signature and a non-repudiation mechanism. The
importing Party’s agreement for the exclusive use of electronic certification can either
be recorded through correspondence in one of the annexes to this Chapter or
by correspondence in accordance with Article 5.14.8.

6.

The European Union may set out its import certificates for live animals and animal
products from Canada with an equivalence status referred to in Annex 5-E in Trade and
Control Export System (“TRACES”).

327

ANNEX 5-J
IMPORT CHECKS AND FEES
SECTION A
Frequencies of checks
The Parties may modify any frequency rate, within their responsibilities, as appropriate,
taking into account the nature of checks applied by the exporting Party prior to export, the
importing Party’s past experience with products imported from the exporting Party, progress
made toward the recognition of equivalence, or as a result of other actions or consultations
provided for in this Agreement.
Table 1 – Frequencies of frontier checks on consignments of live animals, animal products
and animal by-products

Type of frontier check

Normal rate as
referred to in
Article 5.10.1

1. Documentary and identity
Each Party performs documentary and identity checks on all consignments
2. Physical Checks
Live animals

100%

Semen, embryos or ova

10%

Animal products for human consumption
Fresh meat including offal, and products of the bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and
equine species defined in Council Directive 92/5/EEC
Whole eggs
Lard and rendered fats
Animal casings
Gelatin
Poultry meat and poultry meat products
Rabbit meat, game meat (wild/farmed) and products
Milk and milk products
Egg products
Honey
Bone and bone products
Meat preparations and minced meat
Frogs’ legs and snails

328

10%

Animal products not for human consumption
Lard and rendered fats
Animal casings
Milk and milk products
Gelatin
Bone and bone products
Hides and skins ungulates
Game trophies
Processed petfood

10%

Raw material for the manufacture of petfood
Raw material, blood, blood products, glands and organs for pharmaceutical or
technical use
Processed animal protein (packaged)
Bristles, wool, hair and feathers
Horns, horn products, hooves and hoof products
Apiculture products
Hatching eggs
Manure
Hay and straw

329

Processed animal protein not for human consumption (bulked)

Live bivalve molluscan shellfish

100 % for six
consecutive
consignments (as
per Commission
Regulation (EU)
No 142/2011
implementing
Regulation (EC)
No 1069/2009), if
these consecutive
tests prove
negative, random
sampling shall be
reduced to 20 %
of subsequent
bulk
consignments
from the same
source. If one of
these random
sampling proves
positive, the
competent
authority must
sample each
consignment from
the same source
until six
consecutive tests
again prove
negative.
15%

Fish and fishery products for human consumption
Fish products in hermetically sealed containers intended to render them stable at
ambient temperatures, fresh and frozen fish, dry fisheries products, salted fisheries
products, or dry and salted fisheries products

15%

Other fishery products
Live crustaceans or fresh headed and degutted fish without other manual processing

2%

For the purposes of this Annex, “consignment” means a quantity of products of the same type, covered by the
same health certificate or document, conveyed by the same means of transport, consigned by a single consignee
and originating from the same exporting Party or part of that Party.

SECTION B
Fees
To be agreed at a later stage.

330

ANNEX 8-A
EXPROPRIATION
The Parties confirm their shared understanding that:
1.

2.

3.

Expropriation may be direct or indirect:
(a)

direct expropriation occurs when an investment is nationalised or otherwise
directly expropriated through formal transfer of title or outright seizure; and

(b)

indirect expropriation occurs if a measure or series of measures of a Party has an
effect equivalent to direct expropriation, in that it substantially deprives the
investor of the fundamental attributes of property in its investment, including the
right to use, enjoy and dispose of its investment, without formal transfer of title or
outright seizure.

The determination of whether a measure or series of measures of a Party, in a specific
fact situation, constitutes an indirect expropriation requires a case-by-case, fact-based
inquiry that takes into consideration, among other factors:
(a)

the economic impact of the measure or series of measures, although the sole fact
that a measure or series of measures of a Party has an adverse effect on the
economic value of an investment does not establish that an indirect expropriation
has occurred;

(b)

the duration of the measure or series of measures of a Party;

(c)

the extent to which the measure or series of measures interferes with distinct,
reasonable investment-backed expectations; and

(d)

the character of the measure or series of measures, notably their object, context
and intent.

For greater certainty, except in the rare circumstance when the impact of a measure or
series of measures is so severe in light of its purpose that it appears manifestly
excessive, non-discriminatory measures of a Party that are designed and applied to
protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as health, safety and the environment,
do not constitute indirect expropriations.

331

ANNEX 8-B
PUBLIC DEBT
1. For the purposes of this Annex,
negotiated restructuring means the restructuring or rescheduling of debt of a Party that has
been effected through
(a) a modification or amendment of debt instruments, as provided for under their terms,
including, their governing law, or
(b) a debt exchange or other similar process in which the holders of no less than 75 per
cent of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding debt subject to restructuring
have consented to such debt exchange or other process; and
governing law of a debt instrument means a jurisdiction’s laws applicable to that debt
instrument.
2. No claim that a restructuring of debt of a Party breaches an obligation under Sections C and D
may be submitted to, or if already submitted continue under Section F if the restructuring is a
negotiated restructuring at the time of submission, or becomes a negotiated restructuring after
such submission, except for a claim that the restructuring violates Article 8.6 or 8.7.
3. Notwithstanding Article 8.22.1(b) and subject to paragraph 2, an investor of a Party may not
submit a claim under Section F that a restructuring of debt of a Party breaches an obligation
under Sections C and D (other than Article 8.6 or 8.7)40 unless 270 days have elapsed from the
date of submission by the claimant of the written request for consultations pursuant to Article
8.19.
4. For greater certainty, debt of a Party means a debt instrument of any level of government of a
Party.

40

For greater certainty, mere differences in treatment accorded by a Party to certain investors or investments on the
basis of legitimate policy objectives in the context of a debt crisis or threat thereof, including those differences in
treatment resulting from eligibility for debt restructuring, do not amount to a breach of Article 8.6 or 8.7.

332

ANNEX 8-C
EXCLUSIONS FROM DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
A decision by Canada following a review under the Investment Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 28
(1st Supp.), regarding whether or not to permit an investment that is subject to review, is not
subject to the dispute settlement provisions under Section F, or to Chapter Twenty-Nine (Dispute
Settlement). For greater certainty, this exclusion is without prejudice to the right of a Party to
have recourse to Chapter Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement) with respect to the consistency of a
measure with a Party’s reservations, as set out in the Party’s Schedule to Annexes I, II or III, as
appropriate.

333

ANNEX 8-D
JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING ARTICLE 8.12.6
Mindful that investor-State dispute settlement tribunals are meant to enforce the obligations
referred to in Article 8.18.1, and are not an appeal mechanism for the decisions of domestic
courts, the Parties recall that the domestic courts of each Party are responsible for the
determination of the existence and validity of intellectual property rights. The Parties further
recognise that each Party shall be free to determine the appropriate method of implementing the
provisions of this Agreement regarding intellectual property within their own legal system and
practice. The Parties agree to review the relation between intellectual property rights and
investment disciplines within three years after entry into force of this Agreement or at the request
of a Party. Further to this review and to the extent required, the Parties may issue binding
interpretations to ensure the proper interpretation of the scope of investment protection under this
Agreement in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.31.3.

334

ANNEX 8-E
JOINT DECLARATION ON ARTICLES 8.16, 9.7, AND 29.6
With respect to Articles 8.16, 9.7 (Denial of benefits) and 29.6 (National security), the Parties
confirm their understanding that measures that are “related to the maintenance of international
peace and security” include the protection of human rights.

335

ANNEX 8-F
DECLARATION BY CANADA ON THE INVESTMENT CANADA ACT
Canada will increase the threshold for review under the Investment Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c. 28 (1st Supp.) (“ICA”) to CAD $1.5 billion once this Agreement is implemented.
Any future amendments to the ICA would be subject to the requirement that such
amendments could not decrease the conformity of the ICA with the investment obligations of
this Agreement.
As set out in Canada’s ICA reservation (Annex I-C-1), the higher threshold will apply to an
acquisition of a Canadian enterprise by an investor of the European Union that is not a state
enterprise. The determination of whether the acquirer is an investor of the European Union
would be based on whether a national of the European Union controls the acquirer in law, or
in the absence of a majority ownership, whether nationals of the European Union control the
acquirer in fact such as through the ownership of voting interests or through the nationality of
members of the board of directors. Moreover, enterprises of the European Union that are
controlled by nationals from Canada’s existing Free Trade Agreement partners with which
Canada has taken investment commitments would also benefit from the higher threshold.
Canada will amend its ICA to provide for the changes necessary for the higher review
threshold stated above upon the entry into force of this Agreement.

336

ANNEX 9-A
UNDERSTANDING ON NATIONAL TREATMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE
CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES
1.

The European Union and Canada share the following understanding with respect to
the application of Article 9.3 to treatment accorded by a provincial or territorial
government in Canada, or by a government of or in a Member State of the European
Union with respect to the cross-border supply of services as defined in Article 9.1or
the supply of a service by a natural person of a Party in the territory of the other
Party.

2.

Pursuant to Article 9.3, treatment “no less favourable than the most favourable
treatment accorded, in like situations, by that government to its own service suppliers
and services” does not apply to a person of the other Party, or to a service supplied
by this person if:
(a)

in the case of Canada, a provincial or territorial government of Canada accords
more favourable treatment to a service supplier which is a person of another
provincial or territorial government of Canada, or to a service supplied by this
supplier; and

(b)

in the case of the European Union:

(c)

(i)

a government of a Member State of the European Union accords more
favourable treatment to a service supplier which is a person of another
Member State or to a service supplied by this supplier;

(ii)

a regional government of a Member State of the European Union accords
more favourable treatment to a service supplier which is a person of
another regional government of that Member State, or to a service
supplied by this supplier; and

the more favourable treatment referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) is
accorded pursuant to specific mutual rights and obligations applicable between
these governments.

3.

For the European Union, paragraph 2 includes in particular treatment accorded
pursuant to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, done at Lisbon on
13 December 2007 in respect of the free movement of persons and services, as well
as to treatment accorded by any measure adopted pursuant to that Treaty. A
government of or in a Member State of the European Union may accord more
favourable treatment pursuant to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union to those natural persons who are nationals of another Member State of the
European Union, or to enterprises formed in accordance with the law of another
Member State of the European Union and having their registered office, central
administration or principal place of business within the European Union, and to the
services supplied by these natural persons or enterprises.

4.

For Canada, paragraph 2 includes in particular treatment accorded pursuant to the
Canadian Agreement on Internal Trade (“AIT”) as well as to treatment accorded by
any measure adopted pursuant to the AIT and from regional agreements on the free
movement of persons and services. A provincial or territorial government in Canada
337

may accord a more favourable treatment pursuant to the AIT and these regional
agreements to those natural persons who are residents in the territory of a party to the
AIT or regional agreement or to enterprises formed in accordance with the law of a
party to the AIT or regional agreement that have their registered office, central
administration or principal place of business within Canada, and to the services
supplied by these natural persons and enterprises.

338

ANNEX 9-B
UNDERSTANDING ON NEW SERVICES NOT CLASSIFIED IN THE UNITED
NATIONS PROVISIONAL CENTRAL PRODUCT CLASSIFICATION (CPC), 1991
1.

The Parties agree that Chapter Twelve (Domestic Regulation) and Articles 9.3, 9.5,
and 9.6 do not apply to a measure relating to a new service that cannot be classified
in the CPC 1991.

2.

To the extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party prior to adopting a
measure inconsistent with Chapter Twelve (Domestic Regulation), and Articles 9.3,
9.5, and 9.6 with respect to a new service, as referred to in paragraph 1.

3.

At the request of a Party, the Parties shall enter into negotiations to incorporate the
new service into the scope of this Agreement.

4.

For greater certainty, paragraph 1 does not apply to an existing service that could be
classified in the CPC 1991, but that could not previously be supplied on a crossborder basis due to lack of technical feasibility.

339

ANNEX 9-C
UNDERSTANDING ON COURIER SERVICES
1.

The Parties share the following understanding with respect to the application of
Articles 8.2.2(a) and 9.2.2(e).

2.

The Parties confirm that courier services are covered by Chapters Eight (Investment)
and Nine (Cross-Border Trade in Services), subject to applicable reservations as set
out in the Parties’ Schedules to Annexes I and II. For greater certainty, the treatment
offered to courier services under Chapters Eight and Nine does not include the grant
of air traffic rights for courier service suppliers. These rights are subject to the
Agreement on Air Transport between Canada and the European Community and its
Member States, done at Brussels on 17 December 2009 and Ottawa on December 18,
2009.

340

ANNEX 10-A
LIST OF CONTACT POINTS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION
For the purposes of this Annex, the abbreviations are as defined in paragraph 8 of Annex 10-E.
AT
For residence and visa issues:
Department III/4 - Residence, Civil Status and Citizenship Matters
Federal Ministry of the Interior
For labour market issues:
EU labour market laws and international affairs of labour market laws
Federal Ministry for Labour, Social Affairs and Consumer Protection
BE
Direction générale Potentiel économique
Politique Commerciale
BG
Director of International labour migration and mediation
Employment Agency
CY
Director of Civil Registry and Migration Department
Ministry of Interior
CZ
Ministry of Industry and Trade
Department of Common Trade Policy and International Economic Organisations
DE
CETA Advisor
Canadian German Chamber of Industry and Commerce Inc.
DK
Danish Agency for Labour Market and Recruitment
Ministry of Employment
EE
341

Head of Migration- and Border Policy Department
Estonian Ministry of the Interior
EL
Directorate for Justice, Home Affairs & Schengen issues
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
ES
Ministry of Employment and Social Security
FI
Immigration Unit, Section for employed persons
Finnish Immigration Service
FR
Direction générale des étrangers en France (DGEF).
Ministère de l’Intérieur
HR
Head of Trade Policy Department
Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs
HU
Department for Trade Policy and Global Economy
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
IE
Immigration and Citizenship Policy Division
Irish Naturalisation & Immigration Service
IT
DG Trade Policy
Ministry for Economic Development
LT
International Economic Organizations Division
External Economic Relations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Lithuania
LU

342

Bureau des Passeports, Visas et Légalisations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
LV
Office of Citizenship and Migration Affairs of Latvia
MT
Director Citizenship and Expatriate Affairs
Citizenship and Expatriate Affairs Department
Ministry for Home Affairs & National Security
NL
Directorate General for Foreign Economic Relations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
PT
Directorate General for Consular Affairs and Portuguese Communities
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
PL
Department of Trade Policy
Ministry of Economy
RO
Unit for Residence/Staying UE, SEE Citizens and Third Country – Migration Directorate
General Inspectorate for Immigration (GII)
SE
National Board of trade
Ministry of Justice, Division for Migration and Asylum Policy
SI
Migration Policy and Legislation Division
Migration Office
Internal Administrative Affairs, Migration and Naturalization Directorate
Ministry of the Interior
SK
Aliens Police Department

343

Bureau of Border and Aliens Police of Presidium of the Police Force
Trade Policy Department
Ministry of Economy
UK
Head of Migration Policy
Immigration and Border Policy Directorate
Home Office

344

ANNEX 10-B
RESERVATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS APPLYING IN SPECIFIC MEMBER STATES
OF THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR KEY PERSONNEL AND SHORT-TERM BUSINESS
VISITORS
1.

Articles 10.7 and 10.9 do not apply to any existing non-conforming measure listed in
this Annex, to the extent of the non-conformity.

2.

A measure listed in this Annex may be maintained, continued, promptly renewed, or
amended, provided that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure
with Articles 10.7 or 10.9, as it existed immediately before the amendment.41

3.

Business visitors for investment purposes

All sectors

AT: Business visitor needs to be employed by an enterprise other than a non-profit
organisation, otherwise: Unbound.
CZ: Business visitor for investment purposes needs to be employed by an enterprise
other than a non-profit organisation, otherwise: Unbound.
SK: Business visitor for investment purposes needs to be employed by an enterprise
other than a non-profit organisation, otherwise: Unbound. Work permit required,
including economic needs test.
UK: Permissible length of stay: up to 90 days in any twelve month period. Business
visitor needs to be employed by an enterprise other than a non-profit organisation,
otherwise: Unbound.

4.

Investors

All sectors

AT: Economic needs test.
CZ, SK: Work permit, including economic needs test, required in case of investors
employed by an enterprise.
DK: Maximum stay of 90 days within any six month period. If investors wish to
establish a business in Denmark as self-employed, a work permit is required.
FI: Investors need to be employed by an enterprise other than a non-profit
organisation, in a position of middle or top management.
HU: Maximum length of stay 90 days where the investor is not employed by an
enterprise in Hungary. Economic needs test required where the investor is employed
by an enterprise in Hungary.
IT: Economic needs test required where the investor is not employed by an
enterprise.
LT, NL, PL: the category of investors is not recognised with regard to natural
persons representing the investor.
LV: For pre-investment phase maximum length of stay is limited to 90 days within
any six months period. Extension in post-investment phase to one year, subject to

41

This paragraph does not apply to UK reservations.

345

criteria in national legislation such as field and amount of investment made.
UK: The category of investors is not recognised: Unbound.

5.

Intra-corporate transferees (specialists and senior personnel)

All sectors

BG: The number of foreign natural persons employed within a Bulgarian enterprise
may not exceed ten per cent of the average annual number of citizens of the
European Union employed by the respective Bulgarian enterprise. Where less than
100 persons are employed, the number may, subject to authorisation, exceed ten per
cent.
AT, CZ, SK, UK: Intra-corporate transferees need to be employed by an enterprise
other than a non-profit organisation, otherwise: Unbound.
FI: Senior personnel needs to be employed by an enterprise other than a non-profit
organisation.
HU: Natural persons who have been a partner in an enterprise do not qualify to be
transferred as intra-corporate transferees.

6.

Intra-corporate transferees (graduate trainees)

All sectors

AT, CZ, FR, DE, ES, HU, SK: The training which is to be delivered as a result of
the transfer of a graduate trainee to an enterprise must be linked to the university
degree which has been obtained by the graduate trainee.
BG, HU: Economic needs test.
CZ, FI, SK, UK: Graduate trainee needs to be employed by an enterprise other than
a non-profit organisation, otherwise: Unbound.

7.

Short-term business visitors

All activities in Annex
10-D

DK, HR: Work permit, including economic needs test, required in case the shortterm business visitor provides a service in the territory of Denmark or Croatia,
respectively.
LV: Work permit required for operations/activities to be performed on the basis of a
contract.
SK: In case of providing a service in the territory of Slovakia, a work permit,
including economic needs test, is required beyond seven days in a month or 30 days
in calendar year.
UK: The category of short-term business visitors is not recognised: Unbound.

Research and Design

AT: Work permit, including economic needs test, required, except for research
activities of scientific and statistical researchers.
NL: Work permit required, including economic needs test.

Marketing research

AT: Work permit required, including economic needs test. Economic needs test is
waived for research and analysis activities for up to seven days in a month or 30

346

days in a calendar year. University degree required.
NL: Work permit required, including economic needs test.

and

AT: Work permit, including economic needs test, required for activities beyond
seven days in a month or 30 days in a calendar year.

After-Sales or AfterLease Service

AT: Work permit required, including economic needs test. Economic needs test is
waived for persons training workers to perform services and possessing uncommon
knowledge.

Trade
Fairs
Exhibitions

CZ: Work permit is required beyond seven days in a month or 30 days in calendar
year.
FI: Depending on the activity, a residence permit may be required.
SE: Work permit required, except for (i) people who participate in training, testing,
preparation or completion of deliveries, or similar activities within the framework of
a business transaction, or (ii) fitters or technical instructors in connection with
urgent installation or repair of machinery for up to two months, in the context of an
emergency. No economic needs test performed.
AT: Work permit, including economic needs test, required for activities beyond
seven days in a month or 30 days in a calendar year.

Commercial
Transactions

FI: The person needs to be providing services as an employee of an enterprise
located in the territory of the other Party.
NL: Work permit required, including economic needs test.

NL: Work permit required, including economic needs test.

Tourism personnel

FI: The person needs to be providing services as an employee of an enterprise
located in the territory of the other Party.
PL: Unbound.
SE: Work permit required, except for drivers and staff of tourist buses. No
economic needs test performed.
Translation
Interpretation

and

AT, NL: Work permit required, including economic needs test.
PL: Unbound.

347

ANNEX 10-C
EQUIVALENT QUALIFICATIONS FOR ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGISTS AND
SCIENTIFIC TECHNOLOGISTS
For the purpose of this Agreement:
(a)

for engineering technologists (CPC 8672, and 8673): completion of a three year postsecondary degree from an officially recognised institution in engineering technology is
considered equivalent to a university degree; and

(b)

for scientific technologists (CPC 881, 8671, 8674, 8676, 851, 852, 853, 8675, and 883):
completion of a three year post-secondary degree from an officially recognised
institution in the disciplines of agriculture, architecture, biology, chemistry, physics,
forestry, geology, geophysics, mining and energy is considered equivalent to a
university degree.

348

ANNEX 10-D
ACTIVITIES OF SHORT-TERM BUSINESS VISITORS
(a)

meetings and consultations: natural persons attending meetings or conferences, or
engaged in consultations with business associates;

(b)

research and design: technical, scientific and statistical researchers conducting
independent research or research for an enterprise located in the territory of the other
Party;

(c)

marketing research: market researchers and analysts conducting research or analysis
for an enterprise located in the territory of the other Party;

(d)

training seminars: personnel of an enterprise who enter the territory of the other Party
to receive training in techniques and work practices who are employed by companies or
organisations in that Party, provided that the training received is confined to
observation, familiarisation and classroom instruction only;

(e)

trade fairs and exhibitions: personnel attending a trade fair for the purpose of
promoting their company or its products or services;

(f)

sales: representatives of a supplier of services or goods taking orders or negotiating the
sale of services or goods or entering into agreements to sell services or goods for that
supplier, but not delivering goods or supplying services themselves. Short-term business
visitors do not engage in making direct sales to the general public;

(g)

purchasing: buyers purchasing goods or services for an enterprise, or management and
supervisory personnel, engaging in a commercial transaction carried out in the territory
of the other Party;

(h)

after-sales or after-lease service: installers, repair and maintenance personnel, and
supervisors, possessing specialized knowledge essential to a seller’s contractual
obligation, performing services or training workers to perform services, pursuant to a
warranty or other service contract incidental to the sale or lease of commercial or
industrial equipment or machinery, including computer software, purchased or leased
from an enterprise located outside the territory of the Party into which temporary entry
is sought, throughout the duration of the warranty or service agreement;

(i)

commercial transactions: management and supervisory personnel and financial
services personnel (including insurers, bankers and investment brokers) engaging in a
commercial transaction for an enterprise located in the territory of the other Party;

(j)

tourism personnel: tour and travel agents, tour guides or tour operators attending or
participating in conventions or accompanying a tour that has begun in the territory of
the other Party; and

(k)

translation and interpretation: translators or interpreters performing services as
employees of an enterprise located in the territory of the other Party.

349

ANNEX 10-E
SECTORAL COMMITMENTS ON CONTRACTUAL SERVICE SUPPLIERS AND
INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONALS
1.

Each Party shall allow the supply of services in its territory by contractual services
suppliers or independent professionals of the other Party through the presence of natural
persons, in accordance with Article 10.8, for the sectors listed in this Annex, and subject
to the relevant limitations.

2.

The list of reservations is composed of the following elements:
(a)

the first column indicates the sector or sub-sector in which the reservation applies;
and

(b)

the second column describes the applicable limitations.

3.

For Canada, sectoral commitments apply to occupations listed under level “0” and “A”
of Canada’s National Occupational Classification (“NOC”).

4.

In addition to the list of reservations in this Annex, each Party may adopt or maintain a
measure relating to qualification requirements, qualification procedures, technical
standards, licensing requirements or licensing procedures that does not constitute a
limitation within the meaning of Article 10.8. These measures, which include
requirements to obtain a licence, obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors
or to pass specific examinations, such as language examinations, even if not listed in
this Annex, apply in any case to contractual services suppliers or independent
professionals of the Parties.

5.

For the European Union, in the sectors where an economic needs test is applied, the
main criteria is the assessment of the relevant market situation in the Member State of
the European Union or the region where the service is provided, including with respect
to the number of, and the impact on, existing services suppliers.

6.

The European Union takes commitments with respect to Article 10.8 differentiated by
its Member States, as set out in the list of reservations included in this Annex.

7.

The rights and obligations that arise from this Annex have no self-executing effect and
confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons.

8.

The following abbreviations are used in the list of reservations included in this Annex:
AT

Austria

BE

Belgium

BG Bulgaria
CY Cyprus
CZ

Czech Republic

DE

Germany
350

DK Denmark
EE

Estonia

ES

Spain

EU

European Union, including all its Member States

FI

Finland

FR

France

EL

Greece

HR Croatia
HU Hungary
IE

Ireland

IT

Italy

LV

Latvia

LT

Lithuania

LU

Luxembourg

MT Malta
NL

The Netherlands

PL

Poland

PT

Portugal

RO Romania
SK

Slovak Republic

SI

Slovenia

SE

Sweden

UK United Kingdom
CAN Canada
CSS: Contractual Service Suppliers
IP: Independent Professionals
9.

Article 10.8.1 applies to the following sectors or sub-sectors:

351

(a)

Legal advisory services in respect of public international law and foreign law42

(b)

Accounting and bookkeeping services

(c)

Taxation advisory services

(d)

Architectural services and urban planning and landscape architectural services

(e)

Engineering services and integrated engineering services

(f)

Medical and dental services

(g)

Veterinary services

(h)

Midwives services

(i)

Services provided by nurses, physiotherapists and paramedical personnel

(j)

Computer and related services

(k)

Research and development services

(l)

Advertising services

(m) Market research and opinion polling
(n)

Management consulting services

(o)

Services related to management consulting

(p)

Technical testing and analysis services

(q)

Related scientific and technical consulting services

(r)

Mining

(s)

Maintenance and repair of vessels

(t)

Maintenance and repair of rail transport equipment

(u)

Maintenance and repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles and road
transport equipment

(v)

Maintenance and repair of aircrafts and parts thereof

(w) Maintenance and repair of metal products, of (non-office) machinery, of (nontransport and non-office) equipment and of personal and household goods
(x)

Translation and interpretation services

(y)

Telecommunication services

(z)

Postal and courier services

(aa) Construction and related engineering services
42

A reservation for legal services described in Annexes I or II by a Member State for 'domestic law' as
covering 'EU and Member State law' applies to this Annex.

352

(bb) Site investigation work
(cc) Higher education services
(dd) Services relating to agriculture, hunting and forestry
(ee) Environmental services
(ff)

Insurance and insurance related services advisory and consulting services

(gg) Other financial services advisory and consulting services
(hh) Transport advisory and consulting services
(ii)

Travel agencies and tour operators' services

(jj)

Tourist guides services

(kk) Manufacturing advisory and consulting services
10.

Article 10.8.2 applies to the following sectors or sub-sectors:
(a)

Legal advisory services in respect of public international law and foreign law43

(b)

Architectural services and urban planning and landscape architectural services

(c)

Engineering services and integrated engineering services

(d)

Computer and related services

(e)

Research and development services

(f)

Market research and opinion polling

(g)

Management consulting services

(h)

Services related to management consulting

(i)

Mining

(j)

Translation and interpretation services

(k)

Telecommunication services

(l)

Postal and courier services

(m) Higher education services

43

(n)

Insurance related services advisory and consulting services

(o)

Other financial services advisory and consulting services

(p)

Transport advisory and consulting services

(q)

Manufacturing advisory and consulting services

A reservation for legal services described in Annexes I or II by a Member State for 'domestic law' as
covering 'EU and Member State law' applies to this Annex.

353

11.

List of reservations
Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations

EU - ALL SECTORS
Length of stay
In AT, UK: Maximum stay for CSS and IP shall be for a cumulative period
of not more than six months in any 12 month period or for the duration of
the contract, whichever is less.
In LT: Maximum stay for CSS and IP shall be for a period of six months
renewable once for an additional period of six months, or for the duration of
the contract, whichever is less.
In BE, CZ, MT, PT: Maximum stay for CSS and IP shall be for a period of
not more than 12 consecutive months or for the duration of the contract,
whichever is less.

Technologists
Annex 10-C applies to the EU with the exception of: AT, DE, EL, ES, HU,
IT, LT, NL, PT, SK, UK.
In CY: Annex 10-C applies only with regard to technologists active in subsectors CPC 8676, 851, 852, 853, and 883.
In FI: Economic needs test.
In FR: Annex 10-C applies only with regard to technologists active in subsector CPC 86721.
In PL: Technologist must possess as a minimum a degree equivalent to
bachelor's degree.

CAN – ALL SECTORS

Technologists
CAN: Annex 10-C applies.

Legal advisory services in respect
of public international law and
foreign law
(part of CPC 861)

CSS:
In AT, BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, PT, SE,
UK: None.
In BG, CZ, DK, FI, HU, LT, LV, MT, RO, SI, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

IP:

354

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
In AT, CY, DE, EE, FR, HR, IE, LU, LV, NL, PL, PT, SE, UK: None.
In BE, BG, CZ, DK, EL, ES, FI, HU, IT, LT, MT, RO, SI, SK: Economic
needs tests.
CAN: None.

Accounting
services

and

bookkeeping

(CPC 86212 other than “auditing
services”, 86213, 86219 and 86220)

CSS:
In AT, BE, CY, DE, EE, ES, HR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In BG, CZ, DK, EL, FI, FR, HU, LT, LV, MT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Taxation advisory services
(CPC 863)

44

CSS:
In AT, BE, CY, DE, EE, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In BG, CZ, DK, EL, FI, HU, LT, LV, MT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In PT: Unbound.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Architectural services
and

CSS:

Urban planning and landscape

In BE, CY, EE, ES, EL, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,

44

Does not include legal advisory and legal representational services on tax matters, which are under legal
advisory services in respect of public international law and foreign law.

355

Sector or sub-sector
architectural services
(CPC 8671 and 8674)

Description of reservations
UK: None.
In FI: None, except: The natural person must demonstrate that he or she
possesses special knowledge relevant to the service being supplied.
In BG, CZ, DE, HU, LT, LV, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
In AT: Urban planning services only, where: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FR, HR, IE, LU, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In FI: None, except: The natural person must demonstrate that he or she
possesses special knowledge relevant to the service being supplied.
In BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HU, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In AT: Urban planning services only, where: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

Engineering services
and

CSS:

Integrated engineering services

In BE, CY, EE, ES, EL, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.

(CPC 8672 and 8673)

In FI: None, except: The natural person must demonstrate that he or she
possesses special knowledge relevant to the service being supplied.
In BG, CZ, DE, LT, LV, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
In AT: Planning services only, where: Economic needs test.
In HU: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FR, HR, IE, LU, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In FI: None, except: The natural person must demonstrate that he or she
possesses special knowledge relevant to the service being supplied.
In BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.

356

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
In AT: Planning services only, where: Economic needs test.
In HU: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

Medical (including psychologists)
and dental services
(CPC 9312 and part of 85201)

CSS:
In SE: None.
In CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE, ES, IE, IT, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SI:
Economic needs test.
In FR: Economic needs test, except for psychologists, where: Unbound.
In AT: Unbound, except for psychologists and dental services, where:
Economic needs test.
In BE, BG, EL, FI, HR, HU, LT, LV, SK, UK: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Veterinary services
(CPC 932)

CSS:
In SE: None.
In CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, IE, IT, LT, LU, MT, NL, PL,
PT, RO, SI: Economic needs test.
In AT, BE, BG, HR, HU, LV, SK, UK: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Midwives services
(part of CPC 93191)

CSS:

357

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
In SE: None.
In AT, CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE, EL, ES, FR, IE, IT, LT, LV, LU, MT, NL,
PL, PT, RO, SI: Economic needs test.
In BE, BG, FI, HR, HU, SK, UK: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Services provided by nurses,
physiotherapists and paramedical
personnel
(part of CPC 93191)

CSS:
In SE: None.
In AT, CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE, EL, ES, FR, IE, IT, LT, LV, LU, MT, NL,
PL, PT, RO, SI: Economic needs test.
In BE, BG, FI, HR, HU, SK, UK: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Computer and related services
(CPC 84)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT,
SI, SE, UK: None.
In FI: None, except: The natural person must demonstrate that he or she
possesses special knowledge relevant to the service being supplied.
In AT, BG, CZ, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FR, IE, LU, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:

358

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
None.
In FI: None, except: The natural person must demonstrate that he or she
possesses special knowledge relevant to the service being supplied.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HU, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In HR: Unbound.
CAN: None.

Research
Services

and

development
CSS:

(CPC
851,
852
excluding
45
psychologists services , and 853)

EU except in SE: A hosting agreement with an approved research
46
organisation is required .
EU except in CZ, DK, SK: None
In CZ, DK, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU except in SE: A hosting agreement with an approved research
47
organisation is required .
EU except in BE, CZ, DK, IT, SK: None
In BE, CZ, DK, IT, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

Advertising
(CPC 871)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DK, EL, FI, HU, LT, LV, MT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.

45
46

47

Part of CPC 85201, which is under medical and dental services.
For all Member States of the European Union except UK and DK, the approval of the research organisation
and the hosting agreement must meet the conditions set pursuant to EU Directive 2005/71/EC of 12
October 2005.
For all Member States of the European Union except the UK and DK, the approval of the research
organisation and the hosting agreement must meet the conditions set pursuant to EU Directive 2005/71/EC
of 12 October 2005.

359

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Market
polling

research

and

opinion

(CPC 864)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, ES, FR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DK, EL, FI, HR, LV, MT, RO, SI, SK: Economic needs
test.
In PT: None, except for public opinion polling services (CPC 86402),
where: Unbound.
In HU, LT: Economic needs test, except for public opinion polling services
(CPC 86402), where: Unbound.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, FR, IE, LU, NL, PL, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, EL, ES, FI, HR, IT, LV, MT, RO, SI, SK:
Economic needs test.
In PT: None, except for public opinion polling services (CPC 86402),
where: Unbound.
In HU, LT: Economic needs test, except for public opinion polling services
(CPC 86402), where: Unbound.
CAN: None.

Management consulting services
(CPC 865)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL,
PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None.

360

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FI, FR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HR, HU, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
CAN: None.

Services related to management
consulting
(CPC 866)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL,
PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
In HU: Economic needs test, except for arbitration and conciliation services
(CPC 86602), where: Unbound.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FI, FR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HR, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test
In HU: Economic needs test, except for arbitration and conciliation services
(CPC 86602), where: Unbound.
CAN: None.

Technical
services
(CPC 8676)

testing

and

analysis
CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BG, CZ, FI, HU, LT, LV, MT, PT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.

361

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
CAN: Unbound.

Related scientific and technical
consulting services
(CPC 8675)

CSS:
In BE, CY, EE, EL, ES, HR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PL, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, CZ, DE, DK, FI, HU, LT, LV, MT, PT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
In DE: None, except for publicly appointed surveyors, where: Unbound.
In FR: None, except for “surveying” operations relating to the establishment
of property rights and to land law, where: Unbound.
In BG: Unbound.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Mining (CPC 883, advisory and
consulting services only)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL,
PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FI, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HU, IT, LT, PL, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
CAN: None.

Maintenance and repair of vessels
(part of CPC 8868)

CSS:

362

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
In BE, CY, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IT, LV, LU, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None
In AT, BG, CZ, DE, DK, FI, HU, IE, LT, MT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Maintenance and repair of rail
transport equipment
(part of CPC 8868)

CSS:
In BE, CY, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DE, DK, FI, HU, IE, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Maintenance and repair of motor
vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles
and road transport equipment
(CPC 6112, 6122, part of 8867 and
part of 8868)

CSS:
In BE, CY, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IT, LV, LU, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DE, DK, FI, HU, IE, LT, MT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Maintenance and repair of aircraft

363

Sector or sub-sector
and parts thereof
(part of CPC 8868)

Description of reservations
CSS:
In BE, CY, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DE, DK, FI, HU, IE, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Maintenance and repair of metal
products,
of
(non
office)
machinery, of (non transport and
non office) equipment and of
48
personal and household goods
(CPC 633, 7545, 8861, 8862, 8864,
8865 and 8866)

CSS:
In BE, CY, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DE, DK, HU, IE, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In FI: Unbound, except in the context of an after-sales or after-lease
contract, where: the length of stay is limited to six months; for maintenance
and repair of personal and household goods (CPC 633): Economic needs
test.
CAN: None, except for Managers in Utilities, where: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Translation
services

and

interpretation

(CPC 87905, excluding official or
certified activities)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IT, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DK, FI, HU, IE, LT, LV, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

48

Maintenance and repair services of office machinery and equipment including computers (CPC 845) are
under computer services.

364

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
IP:
In CY, DE, EE, FR, LU, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, EL, ES, FI, HU, IE, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic
needs test.
In HR: Unbound.
CAN: None.

Telecommunication services (CPC
7544, advisory and consulting
services only)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL,
PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FI, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HU, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

Postal and courier services (CPC
751, advisory and consulting services
only)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT,
SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, FI, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, FI, HU, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.

365

Sector or sub-sector

Construction
and
engineering services

Description of reservations
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

related

(CPC 511, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516,
517 and 518. BG: CPC 512, 5131,
5132, 5135, 514, 5161, 5162, 51641,
51643, 51644, 5165 and 517)

CSS:
EU: Unbound except in BE, CZ, DK, ES, FR, NL and SE.
In BE, DK, ES, NL, SE: None.
In CZ: Economic needs test.
In FR: Unbound, except for technicians, where: the work permit is delivered
for a period not exceeding six months. Compliance with an economic needs
test is required.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Site investigation work
(CPC 5111)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI,
SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, FI, HU, LT, LV, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Higher education services
(CPC 923)

CSS:
EU except in LU, SE: Unbound.
In LU: Unbound, except for university professors, where: None.
In SE: None, except for publicly funded and privately funded educational

366

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
services suppliers with some form of State support, where: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

IP:
EU except in SE: Unbound.
In SE: None, except for publicly funded and privately funded educational
services suppliers with some form of State support, where: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Agriculture, hunting and forestry
(CPC 881, advisory and consulting
services only)

CSS:
EU except in BE, DE, DK, ES, FI, HR and SE : Unbound
In BE, DE, ES, HR, SE: None
In DK: Economic needs test.
In FI: Unbound, except for advisory and consulting services relating to
forestry, where: None.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Environmental services
(CPC 9401, 9402, 9403, 9404, part of
94060, 9405, part of 9406 and 9409)

CSS:
In BE, CY, EE, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT, SI, SE,
UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DE, DK, EL, HU, LT, LV, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

367

Sector or sub-sector
Insurance and insurance related
services (advisory and consulting
services only)

Description of reservations

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT,
SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, FI, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test except for CSS stays of up to three months.
In HU: Unbound.

CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, FI, IT, LT, PL, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
In HU: Unbound.
CAN: None.

Other financial services (advisory
and consulting services only)
CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, ES, EE, EL, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT,
SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, FI, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS that stays of up to three
months.
In HU: Unbound.
CAN: None.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, FI, IT, LT, NL, PL, RO, SK: Economic
needs test.
In HU: Unbound.

368

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations
CAN: None.

Transport (CPC 71, 72, 73, and 74,
advisory and consulting services
only)

CSS:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL, PT,
SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
In BE: Unbound.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FI, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HU, IT, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In PL: Economic needs test, except for air transport, where: None.
In BE: Unbound.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

Travel agencies and tour operators
49
services (including tour managers )

CSS:

(CPC 7471)

In AT, CY, CZ, DE, EE, ES, FR, HR, IT, LU, NL, PL, SI, SE, UK: None.
In BG, EL, FI, HU, LT, LV, MT, PT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
In BE, IE: Unbound, except for tour managers, where: None.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

49

Services suppliers whose function is to accompany a tour group of a minimum of 10 persons, without
acting as guides in specific locations.

369

Sector or sub-sector

Description of reservations

Tourist guides services
(CPC 7472)

CSS:
In SE, UK: None.
In AT, BE, BG, CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE, FI, FR, EL, HU, IE, IT, LV, LU,
MT, NL, RO, SK, SI: Economic needs test.
In ES, HR, LT, PL, PT: Unbound.
CAN: None.

IP:
EU: Unbound.
CAN: Unbound.

Manufacturing (CPC 884, and 885,
advisory and consulting services
only)

CSS:
In BE, CY, DE, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT, NL, PL,
PT, SI, SE, UK: None.
In AT, BG, CZ, HU, LT, RO, SK: Economic needs test.
In DK: Economic needs test, except for CSS stays of up to three months.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

IP:
In CY, DE, EE, EL, FI, FR, HR, IE, LV, LU, MT, NL, PT, SI, SE, UK:
None.
In AT, BE, BG, CZ, DK, ES, HU, IT, LT, PL, RO, SK: Economic needs
test.
CAN: None, except for Managers, where: Unbound.

370

ANNEX 10-F
UNDERSTANDING ON SPOUSES OF INTRA-CORPORATE TRANSFEREES
1.

For the Member States of the European Union that are subject to the application of
the existing Directive 2014/66/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of
15 May 2014 on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals in
the framework of an intra-corporate transfer (“ICT Directive”), the European Union
shall extend to spouses of Canadian citizens who are intra-corporate transferees to
the European Union, the right of temporary entry and stay equivalent to that granted
to spouses of intra-corporate transferees under the ICT Directive; and

2.

Canada shall extend to spouses of citizens of the European Union who are intracorporate transferees to Canada treatment that is equivalent to the treatment granted
to spouses of Canadian citizens who are intra-corporate transferees in the Member
State of origin of the European Union intra-corporate transferee.

371

ANNEX 11-A
GUIDELINES FOR MRAs
Introduction
This Annex contains guidelines to provide practical guidance to facilitate the negotiation of
MRAs with respect to regulated professions. These guidelines are non-binding and they do not
modify or affect the rights and obligations of a Party under this Agreement.
Definitions
For the purposes of this Annex:
adaptation period means a period of supervised practice, possibly accompanied by further
training, of a regulated profession in the host jurisdiction under the responsibility of a qualified
person. This period of supervised practice shall be subject to an assessment. The detailed rules
governing the adaptation period, its assessment and the professional status of the person under
supervision shall be set out, as appropriate, in the host jurisdiction’s law;
aptitude test means a test limited to the professional knowledge of applicants, made by the
relevant authorities of the host jurisdiction with the aim of assessing the ability of applicants to
pursue a regulated profession in that jurisdiction; and
scope of practice means an activity or group of activities covered by a regulated profession.
Form and Content of the MRA
This Section sets out various issues that may be addressed in a negotiation and, if so agreed,
included in final MRAs. It outlines elements that might be required of foreign professionals
seeking to benefit from an MRA.
1.

Participants

The parties to the MRA should be clearly stated.
2.

Purpose of the MRA

The purpose of the MRA should be clearly stated.
3.

Scope of the MRA

The MRA should set out clearly:
(a)

the scope of the MRA, in terms of the specific professional titles and activities
which it covers;

(b)

who is entitled to use the professional titles concerned;

(c)

whether the recognition mechanism is based on formal qualifications, a licence
obtained in the jurisdiction of origin, or on some other requirement; and

(d)

whether the MRA allows temporary or permanent access to the profession
concerned.

372

4.

Mutual Recognition Provisions

The MRA should clearly specify the conditions to be met for the recognition of qualifications in
each jurisdiction and the level of equivalence agreed.
The following four-step process should be considered to simplify and facilitate the recognition of
the qualifications.
Four-Step Process for the Recognition of Qualifications
Step One: Verification of Equivalency
The negotiating entities should verify the overall equivalence of the scopes of practice or
qualifications of the regulated profession in their respective jurisdictions.
The examination of qualifications should include the collection of all relevant information
pertaining to the scope of practice rights related to a legal competency to practice or to the
qualifications required for a specific regulated profession in the respective jurisdictions.
Consequently, the negotiating entities should:
(a)

identify activities or groups of activities covered by the scope of practice rights of
the regulated profession; and

(b)

identify the qualifications required in each jurisdiction. These may include the
following elements:
(i)

the minimum level of education required, for example, entry requirements,
length of study and subjects studied;

(ii)

the minimum level of experience required, for example, location, length and
conditions of practical training or supervised professional practice prior to
licensing, or the framework of ethical and disciplinary standards;

(iii) examinations passed, especially examinations of professional competency;
(iv) the extent to which qualifications from one jurisdiction are recognised in the
other jurisdiction; and
(v)

the qualifications which the relevant authorities in each jurisdiction are
prepared to recognise, for instance, by listing particular diplomas or
certificates issued, or by reference to particular minimum requirements to be
certified by the relevant authorities of the jurisdiction of origin, including
whether the possession of a certain level of qualification would allow
recognition for some activities of the scope of practice but not others (level
and length of education, major educational focuses, overall subjects and
areas).

There is an overall equivalence between the scope of practice rights or the qualifications of the
regulated profession if there are no substantial differences in this regard between jurisdictions.
Step Two: Evaluation of Substantial Differences

373

There exists a substantial difference in the scope of qualifications required to practice a regulated
profession, in cases of:
(a)

important differences in the essential knowledge; or

(b)

significant differences in the duration or content of the training between the
jurisdictions.

There exists a substantial difference in the scope of practice if:
(a)

one or more professional activities do not form part of the corresponding
profession in the jurisdiction of origin;

(b)

these activities are subject to specific training in the host jurisdiction; and,

(c)

the training for these activities in the host jurisdiction covers substantially
different matters from those covered by the applicant’s qualification.

Step Three: Compensatory Measures
If the negotiating entities determine that there is a substantial difference in the scope of practice
rights or of qualifications between the jurisdictions, they may determine compensatory measures
to bridge the gap.
A compensatory measure may take the form of, among other things, an adaptation period or, if
required, an aptitude test.
Compensatory measures should be proportionate to the substantial difference which they seek to
address. The negotiating entities should also evaluate any practical professional experience
obtained in the jurisdiction of origin to see whether this experience is sufficient to remedy, in
whole or in part, the substantial difference in the scope of practice rights or qualifications
between the jurisdictions, prior to determining a compensatory measure.
Step Four: Identification of the Conditions for Recognition
Once the assessment of the overall equivalency of the scopes of practice rights or qualifications
of the regulated profession is completed, the negotiating entities should specify in the MRA:

5.

(a)

the legal competency required to practice the regulated profession;

(b)

the qualifications for the regulated profession;

(c)

whether compensatory measures are necessary;

(d)

the extent to which professional experience may compensate for substantial
differences;

(e)

a description of any compensatory measure, including the use of any adaptation
period or aptitude test.

Mechanisms for Implementation

The MRA should state:

374

(a)

the rules and procedures to be used to monitor and enforce the provisions of the
agreement;

(b)

the mechanisms for dialogue and administrative co-operation between the parties
to the MRA; and

(c)

the means for individual applicants to address any matters arising from the
interpretation or implementation of the MRA.

As a guide to the treatment of individual applicants, the MRA should include details on:
(a)

the point of contact for information on all issues relevant to the application, for
example, the name and address of the relevant authorities, licensing formalities,
information on additional requirements which need to be met in the host
jurisdiction;

(b)

the duration of the procedures for the processing of applications by the relevant
authorities of the host jurisdiction;

(c)

the documentation required of applicants and the form in which it should be
presented;

(d)

acceptance of documents and certificates issued in the host jurisdiction in relation
to qualifications and licensing;

(e)

the procedures of appeal to or review by the relevant authorities.

The MRA should also include the following commitments by the relevant authorities:

6.

(a)

requests about the licensing and qualification requirements and procedures will be
promptly dealt with;

(b)

adequate time will be provided for applicants to complete the requirements of the
application process and of any appeal to or review by the relevant authorities;

(c)

exams or tests will be arranged with reasonable frequency;

(d)

fees for applicants seeking to take advantage of the terms of the MRA will be
commensurate with the costs incurred by the host jurisdiction; and

(e)

information will be supplied on any assistance programmes in the host jurisdiction
for practical training, and any commitments of the host jurisdiction in that context.

Licensing and Other Provisions in the Host Jurisdiction

If applicable, the MRA should also set out the means by which, and the conditions under which,
a licence is obtained following the determination of eligibility, and what a licence entails, for
example, a licence and its contents, membership of a professional body, use of professional or
academic titles. Any licensing requirements other than qualifications should be explained,
including requirements relating to:
(a)

having an office address, maintaining an establishment or being a resident;

(b)

language skills;
375

(c)

proof of good character;

(d)

professional indemnity insurance;

(e)

compliance with host jurisdiction’s requirements for use of trade or firm names;
and

(f)

compliance with host jurisdiction ethics, for example, independence and good
conduct.

To ensure transparency, the MRA should include the following details for each host jurisdiction:

7.

(a)

the relevant law to be applied, for example, regarding disciplinary action,
financial responsibility or liability;

(b)

the principles of discipline and enforcement of professional standards, including
disciplinary jurisdiction and any consequential effects on practicing professional
activities;

(c)

the means for the ongoing verification of competence; and

(d)

the criteria for, and procedures relating to, revocation of the registration.

Revision of the MRA

If the MRA includes terms under which the MRA can be reviewed or revoked, the details should
be clearly stated.
8.

Transparency

The Parties should:
(a)

make publicly available the text of MRAs which have been concluded; and,

(b)

notify each other of any modifications to qualifications that may affect the
application or implementation of an MRA. If possible, a Party should be given an
opportunity to comment on the modifications of the other Party.

376

ANNEX 13-A
CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN FINANCIAL SERVICES
Schedule of Canada
Insurance and insurance-related services
1.

Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

insurance of risks relating to:
(i)

maritime transport, commercial aviation and space launching and freight,
including satellites, with this insurance to cover: the goods being
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, or liability deriving from
that transport; and

(ii)

goods in international transit;

(b)

reinsurance and retrocession;

(c)

services auxiliary to insurance as described in subparagraph (iv) of the definition
of insurance and insurance-related services in Article 13.1; and

(d)

insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, of insurance risks related
to the services listed in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b).

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
2.

Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of or trade in financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in subparagraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(b)

advisory, and other auxiliary financial services as described in subparagraph (xii)
of the definition of banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in
Article 13.1, but excluding intermediation as described in that subparagraph.

Portfolio Management Services
3.

Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply or trade in financial services, as defined
in sub-paragraphs (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial services in
Article 13.1, with respect to the supply of the following services to a collective
investment scheme located in its territory:
377

(a)

investment advice; and

(b)

portfolio management services, excluding:
(i)

custodial services;

(ii)

trustee services; or

(iii) execution services.
4.

For the purposes of this commitment, portfolio management means managing portfolios
in accordance with mandates given by clients on a discretionary client-by-client basis if
such portfolios include one or more financial instruments.

5.

A collective investment scheme means investment funds or fund management
companies regulated or registered under relevant securities laws and regulations.
Notwithstanding paragraph 3, Canada may require a collective investment scheme
located in Canada to retain ultimate responsibility for the management of the collective
investment scheme or the funds that it manages.

6.

Reservations for non-conforming measures set out by Canada in its Schedule to Annex
III do not apply to paragraphs 3 through 5.

378

Schedule of the European Union (applicable to all Member States of the European Union
unless otherwise indicated)
Insurance and insurance-related services
1.

With the exception of CY, EE, LV, LT, MT and PL50, Article 13.7.1 applies to the
cross-border supply of financial services, as defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the
definition of cross-border supply of financial services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

2.

(i)

maritime transport, commercial aviation and space launching and freight,
including satellites, with this insurance to cover: the goods being
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, or liability deriving from
that transport; and

(ii)

goods in international transit;

(b)

reinsurance and retrocession;

(c)

services auxiliary to insurance as described in sub-paragraph (iv) of the definition
of insurance and insurance-related services in Article 13.1; and

(d)

insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency, of insurance risks related
to the services listed in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b).

For CY, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

50

insurance of risks relating to:

direct insurance services (including co-insurance) for the insurance of risks
relating to:
(i)

maritime transport, commercial aviation and space launching and freight,
including satellites, with this insurance to cover: the goods being
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, or liability deriving from
that transport; and

(ii)

goods in international transit;

(b)

insurance intermediation;

(c)

reinsurance and retrocession; and

(d)

services auxiliary to insurance as described in sub-paragraph (iv) of the definition
of insurance and insurance-related services in Article 13.1.

The abbreviations used in this Annex are defined in paragraph 8 of the Headnote to Annex I (Reservations
for Existing Measures and Liberalisation Commitments).

379

3.

4.

For EE, Article 13.7.1. applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

direct insurance (including co-insurance);

(b)

reinsurance and retrocession;

(c)

insurance intermediation; and

(d)

services auxiliary to insurance as described in sub-paragraph (iv) of the definition
of insurance and insurance-related services in Article 13.1.

For LV and LT, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services,
as defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

5.

(i)

maritime transport, commercial aviation and space launching and freight,
including satellites, with this insurance to cover: the goods being
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, or liability deriving from
that transport; and

(ii)

goods in international transit;

(b)

reinsurance and retrocession; and

(c)

services auxiliary to insurance as described in sub-paragraph (iv) of the definition
of insurance and insurance-related services in Article 13.1.

For MT, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

6.

insurance of risks relating to:

insurance of risks relating to:
(i)

maritime transport, commercial aviation and space launching and freight,
including satellites, with this insurance to cover: the goods being
transported, the vehicle transporting the goods, or liability deriving from
that transport; and

(ii)

goods in international transit;

(b)

reinsurance and retrocession; and

(c)

services auxiliary to insurance as described in sub-paragraph (iv) of the definition
of insurance and insurance-related services in Article 13.1.

For PL, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

insurance of risks relating to goods in international trade; and
380

(b)

reinsurance and retrocession of risks relating to goods in international trade.

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance and insurance-related services)
7.

8.

With the exception of BE, CY, EE, LV, LT, MT, SI and RO, Article 13.7.1 applies to
the cross-border supply of financial services, as defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the
definition of cross-border supply of financial services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(b)

advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

For BE, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

9.

10.

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1.

For CY, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

the trading for own account or for the account of customers, whether on an
exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of transferrable securities;

(b)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(c)

advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

For EE and LT, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services,
as defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

acceptance of deposits;

(b)

lending of all types;

(c)

financial leasing;

(d)

all payment and money transmission services;
381

11.

12.

(e)

guarantees and commitments;

(f)

trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange or
in an over-the-counter market;

(g)

participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent, whether publicly or privately, and supply of services related
to such issues;

(h)

money broking;

(i)

asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of collective
investment management, custodial, depository and trust services;

(j)

settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;

(k)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(l)

advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

For LV, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent, whether publicly or privately, and supply of services related
to such issues;

(b)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(c)

advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

For MT, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

the acceptance of deposits;

(b)

lending of all types;

382

13.

14.

(c)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(d)

advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

For RO, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as
defined in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial
services in Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

acceptance of deposits;

(b)

lending of all types;

(c)

guarantees and commitments;

(d)

money broking;

(e)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(f)

advisory, and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

For SI, Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as defined
in sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial services in
Article 13.1, with respect to:
(a)

lending of all types;

(b)

the acceptance of guarantees and commitments from foreign credit institutions by
domestic legal entities and sole proprietors;

(c)

the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing
and related software, as described in sub-paragraph (xi) of the definition of
banking and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1; and

(d)

advisory and other auxiliary financial services relating to banking and other
financial services, as described in sub-paragraph (xii) of the definition of banking
and other financial services (excluding insurance) in Article 13.1, but not
intermediation as described in that sub-paragraph.

Portfolio Management Services
15.

Article 13.7.1 applies to the cross-border supply of financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial services in Article
383

13.1, with respect to portfolio management services to a European Union professional
client located in the European Union, by a Canadian financial institution organised in
Canada following a transitional period of four years from the entry into force of this
Agreement. For greater certainty, this commitment is subject to the European Union
prudential regulatory regime including equivalence assessment51;
16.

For the purposes of this commitment:
(a)

portfolio management means managing portfolios in accordance with mandates
given by clients on a discretionary client-by-client basis where such portfolios
include one or more financial instruments;

(b)

portfolio management services do not include:

(c)

51

(i)

custodial services;

(ii)

trustee services; or

(ii)

execution services; and

in the European Union professional clients are those defined under point 1, letter
e) of Section I of Annex II of Directive 2004/39/EC of 21 April 2004 on markets
in financial instruments.

This means that once the European Commission has adopted the equivalence decision related to portfolio
management and a Canadian financial institution has satisfied other European Union prudential
requirements, this financial institution may provide discretionary portfolio management services to a
European Union professional client without being established in the European Union. Furthermore,
measures of Member States of the European Union restricting or prohibiting cross-border portfolio
management including reservations in its Schedules to Annexes I and II shall no longer apply to this
commitment.

384

ANNEX 13-B
UNDERSTANDING ON THE APPLICATION OF ARTICLES 13.16.1 AND 13.21
The Parties recognise that prudential measures strengthen domestic financial systems, encourage
sound, efficient and robust institutions, markets and infrastructure, and promote international
financial stability by facilitating better-informed lending and investment decisions, improving
market integrity and reducing the risks of financial distress and contagion.
As a result, the Parties have agreed to a prudential carve-out in Article 13.16.1 allowing the
Parties to adopt or maintain measures for prudential reasons, and have provided a role for the
Financial Services Committee, established pursuant to Article 26.2.1(f), in determining whether,
and if so, to what extent the prudential carve out applies in investment disputes in financial
services pursuant to Article 13.21.
Process relating to Article 13.21
1.

The Financial Services Committee, in its role in investment disputes pursuant to Article
13.21, shall decide whether and, if so, to what extent the prudential carve-out is a valid
defence to a claim.

2.

The Parties undertake to act in good faith. Each Party shall present its position to the
Financial Services Committee within 60 days of the referral to the Financial Services
Committee.

3.

If the non-disputing Party notifies the Financial Services Committee within the 60 day
period in paragraph 2 that it has launched an internal determination process on this
matter, the period of time referred to in paragraph 2 is suspended until that Party notifies
the Financial Services Committee of its position. A suspension beyond six months is
considered as a breach of the good faith undertaking.

4.

If the respondent does not provide its position to the Financial Services Committee
within the period of time referred to in paragraph 2, the suspension of the periods of
time or proceedings referred to in Article 13.21.3 no longer applies and the investor may
proceed with its claim.

5.

If the Financial Services Committee is unable to adopt a decision on a joint
determination within 60 days in relation to a specific investor-state dispute concerning a
prudential measure, the Financial Services Committee shall refer the matter to the
CETA Joint Committee52. This period of 60 days commences from the moment the
Financial Services Committee receives the positions of the Parties pursuant to paragraph
2.

6.

The joint determination of the Financial Services Committee or of the CETA Joint
Committee is binding on the Tribunal only in the dispute in question. The joint

52

Each Party shall ensure that its representation in the CETA Joint Commission for this purpose includes
financial services authorities.

385

determination does not constitute a binding precedent for the Parties with respect to the
scope and application of the prudential carve-out or other terms of this Agreement.
7.

Unless the CETA Joint Committee decides otherwise, if the CETA Joint Committee
does not reach an agreement within three months of a referral of the matter by the
Financial Services Committee pursuant to paragraph 5, each Party shall make its
position available to the Tribunal that arbitrates the dispute in question. The Tribunal
shall take into account this record in reaching a decision.

High level principles
8.

The Parties agree that the application of Article 13.16.1 by the Parties and by tribunals
should be guided by the following principles, which are not exhaustive:
(a)

Party may determine its own appropriate level of prudential regulation.
Specifically, a Party may establish and enforce measures that provide a higher
level of prudential protection than those set out in common international
prudential commitments;

(b)

relevant considerations in determining whether a measure meets the requirements
of Article 13.16.1 include the extent to which a measure may be required by the
urgency of the situation and the information available to the Party at the time
when the measure was adopted;

(c)

given the highly specialised nature of prudential regulation, those applying these
principles shall defer to the highest degree possible to regulations and practices in
the Parties’ respective
jurisdictions and to
the
decisions
and factual
determinations, including risk assessments, made by financial regulatory
authorities;

(d)

(i)

except as provided in subparagraph (ii), a measure is deemed to meet the
requirements of Article 13.16.1 if it:
(A) has a prudential objective; and
(B)

(ii)

(e)

is not so severe in light of its purpose that it is manifestly
disproportionate to the attainment of its objective; and

a measure that otherwise meets the requirements of subparagraph (i) does
not meet the requirements of Article 13.16.1 if it is a disguised restriction on
foreign investment or an arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between
investors in like situations;

provided that a measure is not applied in a manner which would constitute a
means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between investors in like
situations, or a disguised restriction on foreign investment, that measure is deemed
to meet the requirements of Article 13.16.1 if it is:
(i)

in line with international prudential commitments that are common to the
Parties;

386

(ii)

in pursuance of the resolution of a financial institution that is no longer
viable or likely to be no longer viable;

(iii) in pursuance of the recovery of a financial institution or the management of
a financial institution under stress; or
(iv) in pursuance of the preservation or the restoration of financial stability, in
response to a system-wide financial crisis.
Periodic Review
9.

The Financial Services Committee may, by consent of both Parties, amend this
Understanding at any time. The Financial Services Committee should review this
Understanding at least every two years.
In this context, the Financial Services Committee may develop a common
understanding on the application of Article 13.16.1, on the basis of the dialogue and
discussions held in the Committee in relation to specific disputes and mindful of
international prudential commitments that are common to the Parties.

387

ANNEX 13-C
UNDERSTANDING ON THE DIALOGUE ON THE REGULATION OF THE
FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR
The Parties reaffirm their commitment to strengthening financial stability. The dialogue on
the regulation of the financial services sector within the Financial Services Committee shall
be based on the principles and prudential standards agreed at the multilateral level. The
Parties undertake to focus the discussion on issues with cross-border impact, such as crossborder trade in securities (including the possibility of taking further commitments on portfolio
management), the respective frameworks for covered bonds and for collateral requirements in
reinsurance, and to discuss issues related to the operation of branches.

388

ANNEX 19-1
Central government entities
Unless otherwise specified, this Chapter covers procurement by entities listed in this Annex,
subject to the following thresholds:
Thresholds:
Goods
Services
Construction Services

SDR 130,000
SDR 130,000
SDR 5,000,000

When entities listed in this Annex conduct procurement for activities listed in Section B of
Annex 19-3, the thresholds set out in that section apply.
List of Entities
1.

Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency

2.

Canada Border Services Agency

3.

Canada Emission Reduction Incentives Agency

4.

Canada Employment Insurance Commission

5.

Canada Industrial Relations Board

6.

Canada Revenue Agency

7.

Canada School of Public Service

8.

Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety

9.

Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency

10.

Canadian Food Inspection Agency

11.

Canadian Forces Grievance Board

12.

Canadian Grain Commission

13.

Canadian Human Rights Commission

14.

Canadian Human Rights Tribunal

15.

Canadian Institutes of Health Research

16.

Canadian Intergovernmental Conference Secretariat

17.

Canadian International Trade Tribunal

18.

Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency

19.

Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission

20.

Canadian Polar Commission

21.

Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission

22.

Canadian Space Agency
389

23.

Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board

24.

Canadian Transportation Agency

25.

Copyright Board

26.

Correctional Service of Canada

27.

Courts Administration Service

28.

Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food

29.

Department of Canadian Heritage

30.

Department of Citizenship and Immigration

31.

Department of Employment and Social Development

32.

Department of Finance

33.

Department of Fisheries and Oceans

34.

Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development

35.

Department of Health

36.

Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development

37.

Department of Industry

38.

Department of Justice

39.

Department of National Defence

40.

Department of Natural Resources

41.

Department of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness

42.

Department of Public Works and Government Services

43.

Department of the Environment

44.

Department of Transport

45.

Department of Veterans Affairs

46.

Department of Western Economic Diversification

47.

Director of Soldier Settlement

48.

Director, The Veterans’ Land Act

49.

Economic Development Agency of Canada for the Regions of Quebec

50.

Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario

51.

Financial Consumer Agency of Canada

52.

Immigration and Refugee Board

53.

Indian Residential Schools Truth and Reconciliation Commission

54.

Library and Archives of Canada

55.

Military Police Complaints Commission

56.

National Battlefields Commission
390

57.

National Energy Board

58.

National Farm Products Council

59.

National Film Board

60.

Parole Board of Canada

61.

National Research Council of Canada

62.

Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council

63.

Northern Pipeline Agency

64.

Office of Infrastructure of Canada

65.

Office of the Auditor General

66.

Office of the Chief Electoral Officer

67.

Office of the Commissioner for Federal Judicial Affairs

68.

Office of the Commissioner of Lobbying

69.

Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages

70.

Office of the Communications Security Establishment Commissioner

71.

Office of the Co-ordinator, Status of Women

72.

Office of the Correctional Investigator of Canada

73.

Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions

74.

Office of the Governor General’s Secretary

75.

Office of the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner

76.

Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions

77.

Office of the Information Commissioner of Canada

78.

Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada

79.

Parks Canada Agency

80.

Patented Medicine Prices Review Board

81.

Privy Council Office

82.

Public Health Agency of Canada

83.

Public Service Commission

84.

Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board

85.

Registrar of the Supreme Court of Canada

86.

Registry of the Competition Tribunal

87.

Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal

88.

Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal

89.

Royal Canadian Mounted Police

90.

Royal Canadian Mounted Police External Review Committee
391

91.

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Public Complaints Commission

92.

Security Intelligence Review Committee

93.

Shared Services Canada

94.

Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council

95.

Statistics Canada

96.

Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada

97.

Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat

98.

Veterans Review and Appeal Board

Notes to Canada’s Annex 19-1
1.

For the Canadian Space Agency, the procurement of covered goods and services is
limited to those related to satellite communications, earth observation and global
navigation satellite systems. This commitment is in effect for a five-year
period following the entry into force of this Agreement. The calculation of the fiveyear period includes the period of provisional application, if any. Before the end of
the five-year period, Canada may notify the European Union that it is removing the
temporary commitment. The notification takes effect at the end of the five-year
period. If Canada does not provide such notification, the temporary commitment will
become permanent.

2.

Article 19.18 of this Chapter does not apply to the possible removal of the temporary
commitment in this Note.

392

ANNEX 19-2
Sub-central government entities
Unless otherwise specified, this Chapter covers procurement by entities listed in this Annex,
subject to the following thresholds.
Thresholds:
Goods
Services
Construction Services

SDR 200,000
SDR 200,000
SDR 5,000,000

When entities listed in this Annex conduct procurement for activities listed in Section B of
Annex 19-3, the thresholds set out in that section apply.
List of entities:
1.

ALBERTA
1.1

1.2

This Annex includes all:
1.

departments, ministries, agencies, boards, councils,
commissions and similar agencies of government;

2.

regional, local, district or other forms of municipal government; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

This Annex does not include:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

2.

committees,

Legislative Assembly
Legislative Assembly Office
Office of the Auditor General
Office of the Chief Electoral Officer
Office of the Ethics Commissioner
Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Ombudsman

BRITISH COLUMBIA
2.1

This Annex includes all:
1.

ministries, agencies, boards, councils, committees, commissions and
similar agencies of government;

2.

regional, local, district or other forms of municipal government; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

2.2. This Annex does not include the Legislative Assembly and its independent
offices.
3.

MANITOBA
3.1

This Annex includes all:

393

4.

1.

departments, boards, commissions, committees and similar agencies of
government;

2.

municipalities, municipal organisations; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

NEW BRUNSWICK
4.1

This Annex includes the following departments, secretariats and agencies:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

Aboriginal Affairs Secretariat
Agriculture, Aquaculture and Fisheries
Ambulance New Brunswick Inc.
Aquarium and Marine Center of New Brunswick
Office of the Attorney General
Child and Youth Advocate
Education and Early Childhood Development
Efficiency New Brunswick
Elections New Brunswick
Energy and Mines
Environment and Local Government
Executive Council Office
FacilicorpNB Ltd.
Farm Products Commission
Finance
Forest Protection Limited
Health
Horizon Health Network (Regional Health Authority)
Justice
Labour and Employment Board
Natural Resources
New Brunswick Arts Board
New Brunswick Emergency Measures Organization
New Brunswick Energy & Utilities Board
New Brunswick Forest Products Commission
New Brunswick Health Council
New Brunswick Human Rights Commission
New Brunswick Insurance Board
New Brunswick Internal Services Agency
New Brunswick Lotteries Commission
New Brunswick Museum
New Brunswick Police Commission
New Brunswick Public Libraries
Office of Human Resources
Office of the Auditor General
Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages
Office of the Comptroller
Office of the Consumer Advocate for Insurance
Office of the Leader of the Opposition
394

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
4.2

District Education Councils
1.

4.3

Collège communautaire du Nouveau-Brunswick (CCNB)
New Brunswick Community College (NBCC)

Regional Solid Waste Commissions
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

4.6

Mount Allison University
St. Thomas’ University
Université de Moncton
The University of New Brunswick

Community Colleges
1.
2.

4.5

All District Education Councils

Universities
1.
2.
3.
4.

4.4

Office of the Lieutenant-Governor
Office of the Premier
Office of the Public Trustee
Ombudsman
Population Growth Secretariat
Post-Secondary Education, Training and Labour
Premier’s Council on the Status of Disabled Persons
Public Safety
Vitalité (Regional Health Authority)
Senior and Healthy Aging Secretariat
Social Development
Government Services
Tourism, Heritage and Culture
Transportation
Village Historique Acadien
Workplace Health, Safety and Compensation Commission

Commission de gestion déchets de Kent
Commission de gestion des déchets solides de la Péninsule acadienne
Commission des Déchets Solides / Nepisiguit-Chaleur Solid Waste
Commission
Fredericton Region Solid Waste Commission
Fundy Region Solid Waste Commission
Kings County Region Solid Waste Commission
La Commission de gestion enviro ressources du Nord-Ouest
Northumberland Solid Waste Commission
Restigouche Solid Waste Corporation
Southwest Solid Waste Commission
Valley Solid Waste Commission
Westmorland-Albert Solid Waste Corporation

Wastewater Commissions
1.
2.

Fredericton Area Pollution Control Commission
Greater Moncton Sewerage Commission

395

4.7

Municipalities and Municipal Organisations (does not include municipal
energy entities)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

5.

NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR
5.1

5.2
6.

6.2

1.

departments, boards, commissions;

2.

municipalities, municipal organisations; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

This Annex does not include the Legislative Assembly.
This Annex includes all:
1.

ministries, agencies;

2.

municipalities; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

This Annex does not include the Legislative Assembly.

NOVA SCOTIA
7.1

8.

This Annex includes all:

NORTHWEST TERRITORIES
6.1

7.

City of Bathurst
City of Campbellton
City of Dieppe
City of Edmundston
City of Fredericton
City of Miramichi
City of Moncton
City of Saint John

This Annex includes all public sector entities as defined in the Public
Procurement Act, S.N.S. 2011, c. 12, except:
1.

any listed intergovernmental or privatised governmental unit if the
Province does not own or control a majority of it;

2.

any entity listed or described in Section A of Annex 19-3, whether as an
inclusion or exclusion;

3.

Emergency Health Services (a division of the Department of Health) in
respect of ground ambulance-related procurement, for Emergency Health
Care purposes;

4.

Sydney Tar Ponds Agency;

5.

Nova Scotia Lands Inc.; and

6.

Harbourside Commercial Park.

NUNAVUT

396

8.1

8.2
9.

1.

ministries, agencies;

2.

municipalities, municipal organisations; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

This Annex does not include the Legislative Assembly.

ONTARIO
9.1

9.2
10.

This Annex includes all:

This Annex includes all:
1.

provincial ministries and classified agencies but does not include energy
agencies, agencies of a commercial or industrial nature, and Ontario
Infrastructure and Lands Corporation;

2.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities; and

3.

municipalities but does not include municipal energy entities.

This Annex does not include the Offices of the Legislative Assembly.

PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
10.1 This Annex includes all:

11.

1.

departments, agencies;

2.

municipalities; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

QUÉBEC
11.1 This Annex includes all:
1.

departments, governmental agencies; and

2.

para-public organisations.

“Governmental agencies” means the bodies set out in subparagraphs (2) through (4) of the
first paragraph of section 4 of the Act Respecting Contracting by Public Bodies, C.Q.L.R. c.
C-65.1, including the Agence du revenu du Québec, and the persons set out in the second
paragraph of that section, with the exception of the bodies and persons mentioned in section 5
of the Act.
“Para-public organisations” means the municipalities, the municipal organisations, and the
bodies set out in subparagraphs (5) and (6) of the first paragraph of section 4 of the Act
Respecting Contracting by Public Bodies, including the legal persons or other entities owned
or controlled by one or several para-public organisations.
12.

SASKATCHEWAN
12.1 This Annex includes all:
1.

ministries, agencies, Treasury Board Crown corporations, boards,
commissions;
397

13.

2.

municipalities; and

3.

school boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities.

YUKON
13.1 This Annex includes:
Departments
1.
Department of Community Services
2.
Department of Economic Development
3.
Department of Education
4.
Department of Energy, Mine and Resources
5.
Department of Environment
6.
Department of Finance
7.
Department of Health and Social Services
8.
Department of Highways and Public Works
9.
Department of Justice
10. Department of Tourism and Culture
11. Executive Council Office
12. Public Service Commission
13. Women’s Directorate
14. French Language Services Directorate
Agencies
1.
Yukon Worker’s Compensation Health

398

&

Safety

Board

ANNEX 19-3
Other entities
Section A
Unless otherwise specified, this Chapter covers procurement by entities listed in Section A of
this Annex, subject to the following thresholds:
Thresholds:
Goods
Services
Construction Services

SDR 355,000
SDR 355,000
SDR 5,000,000

When conducting procurement for activities listed in Section B, the thresholds set out in that
section apply.
List of entities
1.

FEDERAL ENTITIES
1.1

2.

ALBERTA
2.1

3.

This Annex includes all:
1.

Crown corporations, government-owned commercial enterprises, and
other entities that are owned by the Government of Alberta through
ownership interest; and

2.

corporations or entities owned or controlled by a regional, local, district
or other form of municipal government covered under Annex 19-2.

BRITISH COLUMBIA
3.1

4.

This Annex includes all Crown corporations within the meaning of Part X of
the Financial Administration Act (FAA) R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11, which are
accountable to Parliament under section 88 of the FAA.

This Annex includes all:
1.

Crown corporations, government-owned commercial enterprises, and
other entities that are owned by the Government of British Columbia
through ownership interest; and

2.

corporations or entities owned or controlled by one or more municipal
governments.

MANITOBA
4.1

This Annex includes all provincial Crown corporations, except:
1.
2.

5.

Manitoba Public Insurance Corporation
Venture Manitoba Tours Limited

NEW BRUNSWICK
5.1

This Annex includes the following Crown corporations:
1.
2.

Kings Landing Corporation
New Brunswick Credit Union Deposit Insurance Corporation
399

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
6.

NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR
6.1

7.

Nalcor Energy and all its existing and future subsidiaries and affiliates,
except for Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro.

2.

Research & Development Corporation of Newfoundland and Labrador
and any subsidiary thereof.

This Annex includes all territorial Crown corporations.
This Annex includes any entity designated as a government business enterprise
pursuant to the Finance Act, S.N.S. 2010, c. 2, and the Public Procurement
Act, except any listed intergovernmental or privatised governmental unit under
the Provincial Finance Act if the Province does not own or control a majority
of it.

NUNAVUT
9.1

10.

1.

NOVA SCOTIA
8.1

9.

This Annex includes all provincial Crown Corporations other than:

NORTHWEST TERRITORIES
7.1

8.

New Brunswick Highway Corporation
New Brunswick Housing Corporation
New Brunswick Investment Management Corporation
New Brunswick Liquor Corporation
New Brunswick Municipal Finance Corporation
New Brunswick Research and Productivity Council
Opportunities New Brunswick
Financial and Consumer Services Commission
Regional Development Corporation
Service New Brunswick

This Annex includes all territorial Crown corporations.

ONTARIO
10.1 This Annex includes all provincial and municipal government-owned entities
of a commercial or industrial nature.
10.2 This Annex does not include energy entities except for Hydro One and Ontario
Power Generation.

11.

PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
11.1 This Annex includes all provincial Crown corporations except: Innovation PEI

12.

QUÉBEC
12.1 This Annex includes government enterprises and legal persons or other entities
that are owned or controlled by one or several of these enterprises, which are
not in competition with the private sector.
12.2 Government enterprise means a body set out in section 7 of the Act
Respecting Contracting by Public Bodies.

13.

SASKATCHEWAN
400

13.1 This Annex includes all provincial Crown corporations, corporations owned or
controlled by one or more municipal governments and the Saskatchewan
Liquor and Gaming Authority.
14.

YUKON

This Annex includes all Government Corporations within the meaning of the Corporate
Governance Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 45, except:
(a)

Yukon Development Corporation

Notes to Canada’s Section A of Annex 19-3
1.

This Annex does not cover procurement in respect of the intervention activities of the
Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation or its subsidiaries, or procurements by any
subsidiary created in respect of such intervention activities.

2.

This Annex does not cover procurement by the Canada Lands Company Limited or
its subsidiaries for the development of real property for commercial sale or resale.

3.

Ontario Power Generation reserves the right to accord a preference to tenders that
provide benefits to the province, such as favouring local sub-contracting, in the
context of procurements relating to the construction or maintenance of nuclear
facilities or related services. A selection criterion of benefits to the province in the
evaluation of tenders shall not exceed 20 per cent of total points.

4.

This Chapter does not cover procurement for the production, transmission and
distribution of renewable energy, other than hydro-electricity, by the province of
Ontario as set out in the Green Energy Act, S.O. 2009, c. 12, Sch. A.

Section B
The following thresholds apply to procurement by procuring entities in Annexes 19-1 and 192 and Section A of 19-3, which have as one of their core activities any of those referred to
below or any combination thereof:
1.

Provision of airport or other terminal facilities to air carriers;

2.

Provision or operation of networks providing a service to the public in the field of
transport by railway, automated systems, tramway, trolley bus, bus or cable;

3.

Provision of maritime or inland port or other terminal facilities to carriers by sea or
inland waterway;

4.

Provision or operation of fixed networks intended to provide a service to the public
in connection with the production, transport or distribution of drinking water and
treatment of wastewater, or the supply of drinking water to such networks;

5.

Provision or operation of fixed networks intended to provide a service to the public
in connection with the production, transport or distribution of electricity, or the
supply of electricity to such networks; or

6.

Provision or operation of fixed networks intended to provide a service to the public
in connection with the production, transport or distribution of gas or heat, or the
supply of gas or heat to such networks.

Thresholds:

401

Goods
Services
Construction Services

SDR 400,000
SDR 400,000
SDR 5,000,000

Notes to Canada’s Section B of Annex 19-3
1.

This Chapter does not cover procurement by procuring entities for the activities
listed in Section B above when exposed to competitive forces in the market
concerned.

2.

This Chapter does not cover procurement by procuring entities for the activities
listed in Section B:

3.

(a)

for the purchase of water, energy, or fuels for the production of energy;

(b)

for the pursuit of such activities outside of Canada; or

(c)

for purposes of re-sale or hire to third parties, provided that the procuring entity
enjoys no special or exclusive right to sell or hire the subject of such contracts
and other entities are free to sell or hire it under the same conditions as the
procuring entity.

This Chapter does not cover procurements by procuring entities for the purposes of
exploitation of a geographical area for the purpose of exploring for or extracting oil,
gas, coal, or other solid fuels.

402

ANNEX 19-4
Goods
1.

Unless otherwise specified, this Chapter covers all goods.

2.

Subject to the application of Article 19.3.1, with respect to procurement by the
Department of National Defence, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the
Department of Fisheries and Oceans for the Canadian Coast Guard, the Canadian Air
Transport Security Authority, and provincial and municipal police forces, this
Chapter covers only the goods described in any of the Federal Supply Classifications
(FSC) listed below:

FSC

22.

Railway equipment

FSC

23.

Motor vehicles, trailers and cycles (except buses in 2310; and, except
military trucks and trailers in 2320 and 2330 and tracked combat,
assault and tactical vehicles in 2350 and wheeled combat, assault
and tactical vehicles in 2350 formerly classified in 2320)

FSC

24.

Tractors

FSC

25.

Vehicular equipment components

FSC

26.

Tires and tubes

FSC

29.

Engine accessories

FSC

30.

Mechanical power transmission equipment

FSC

32.

Woodworking machinery and equipment

FSC

34.

Metal working machinery

FSC

35.

Service and trade equipment

FSC

36.

Special industry machinery

FSC

37.

Agricultural machinery and equipment

FSC

38.

Construction, mining, excavating and highway maintenance
equipment

FSC

39.

Materials handling equipment

FSC

40.

Rope, cable, chain and fittings

FSC

41.

Refrigeration and air conditioning equipment

FSC

42.

Fire fighting, rescue and safety equipment (except 4220: Marine
lifesaving and diving equipment; and 4230: Decontaminating and
impregnating equipment)

FSC

43.

Pumps and compressors

FSC

44.

Furnace, steam plant, drying equipment and nuclear reactors

FSC

45.

Plumbing, heating and sanitation equipment

403

FSC

46.

Water purification and sewage treatment equipment

FSC

47.

Pipe, tubing, hose and fittings

FSC

48.

Valves

FSC

49.

Maintenance and repair shop equipment

FSC

52.

Measuring tools

FSC

53.

Hardware and abrasives

FSC

54.

Prefabricated structures and scaffolding

FSC

55.

Lumber, millwork, plywood and veneer

FSC

56.

Construction and building materials

FSC

61.

Electric wire and power and distribution equipment

FSC

62.

Lighting fixtures and lamps

FSC

63.

Alarm and signal systems (except 6350: Security detection systems
related to security screening)

FSC

65.

Medical, dental and veterinary equipment and supplies

FSC

66.

Instruments and laboratory equipment (except 6615: Automatic pilot
mechanisms and airborne Gyro components; 6635: Physical properties
testing and inspection related to security screening; and 6665: Hazard
detecting instruments and apparatus)

FSC

67.

Photographic equipment

FSC

68.

Chemicals and chemical products

FSC

69.

Training aids and devices

FSC

70.

General purpose automatic data processing equipment, software,
supplies and support equipment (except 7010: Automatic Data
Processing Equipment (ADPE) configurations)

FSC

71.

Furniture

FSC

72.

Household and commercial furnishings and appliances

FSC

73.

Food preparation and serving equipment

FSC

74.

Office machines, text processing system and visible record
equipment

FSC

75.

Office supplies and devices

FSC

76.

Books, maps and other publications (except 7650: drawings and
specifications)

FSC

77.

Musical instruments, phonographs and radios

FSC

78.

Recreational and athletic equipment

404

FSC

79.

Cleaning equipment and supplies

FSC

80.

Brushes, paints, sealers and adhesives

FSC

81.

Containers, packaging and packing supplies

FSC

85.

Toiletries

FSC

87.

Agricultural supplies

FSC

88.

Live animals

FSC

91.

Fuels, lubricants, oils and waxes

FSC

93.

Nonmetallic fabricated materials

FSC

94.

Nonmetallic crude materials

FSC

96.

Ores, minerals and their primary products

FSC

99.

Miscellaneous

Notes to Canada’s Annex 19-4
1.

For the Provinces of Ontario and Québec, this Note applies to the procurement of
mass transit vehicles. A mass transit vehicle refers to a street car, bus, trolley bus,
subway car, passenger rail car or locomotive for subway or rail system used for
public transportation.
(a)

Procuring entities in the provinces of Ontario and Québec, when purchasing
mass transit vehicles, may, in accordance with the terms of this Chapter,
require that the successful bidder contracts up to 25 per cent of the contract
value in Canada.

(b)

Any lowering of such percentage of contract value decided by the Government
of Canada or the province of Ontario or the province of Québec, as a result of
an international agreement or in domestic law, regulation or policy, will
replace the abovementioned percentage of 25 per cent on a permanent basis
under this Chapter for that province and for the category of mass transit vehicle
to which such new percentage applies. When applying this note, the provinces
of Ontario and Québec must treat European Union bidders no less favourably
than Canadian or other third country bidders.

(c)

The term “value” refers to the eligible costs in the procurement of mass transit
vehicles for components, sub-components and raw materials produced in
Canada, including labour or other related services such as after-sale and
maintenance services, as determined in the tender. It also includes all costs
related to a final assembly of the mass transit vehicle in Canada. It will be for
the bidder to determine which part of the contract value will be fulfilled
through the use of Canadian acquired value. However, the province of Québec
may require that final assembly takes place in Canada.

(d)

Final assembly:
(i)

Final assembly of a bus includes:

405

(A) installation and interconnection of the engine, transmission, axles,
including the brake system;
(B)

installation and interconnection of heating and air conditioning
systems;

(C)

installation of pneumatic, electrical and door systems;

(D) installation of passenger seats and handrails;
(E)

installation of thedestination sign;

(F)

installation of the wheelchair access ramp; and

(G) final inspection, road tests and preparation for delivery.
(ii)

Final assembly of a train includes:
(A) installation and connection of the ventilation, heating and air
conditioning system;
(B)

installation and connection of bogie frames, suspension, axles and
differential;

(C)

installation and connection of propulsion engines, propulsion
control and auxiliary power;

(D) installation and connection of braking control, braking equipment
and air brake compressors;
(E)

installation and connection of communication system, on-board
information and remote monitoring system; and

(F)

inspection, verification of all installation and interconnection work
and fixed-point testing to verify all functions.

(e)

The eligible costs must provide reasonable flexibility for a successful bidder to
source the contract value on competitive terms from Canadian suppliers,
including price and quality. Contracts may not be split with the purpose of
restricting the choice of eligible costs by the bidder.

(f)

The procuring entities must indicate the existence of such conditions clearly
and objectively in both tender notices and contract documents.

(g)

The application of this paragraph will be revisited five years after entry into
force of this Agreement.

(h)

The application of this paragraph will be revisited with a view to reduce its
inconsistency with the provisions of this Chapter in the event that the United
States of America permanently lowers its local content restrictions applicable
to transit vehicles (rolling stock) below 25 per cent for local and state
contracting authorities.

2.

For the Province of Prince Edward Island, this Annex does not cover procurement of
construction materials that are used for highway construction and maintenance.

3.

For the Province of Québec, this Annex does not cover procurement of the following
goods by Hydro-Québec (identified in accordance with the HS): HS 7308.20; HS

406

8406; HS 8410; HS 8426; HS 8504; HS 8535; HS 8536; HS 8537; HS 8544; HS
8705.10; HS 8705.20; HS 8705.90; HS 8707; HS 8708; HS 8716.39; or HS 8716.40.
4.

For the Province of Manitoba, this Annex does not cover procurement of the
following goods by Manitoba Hydro Electric Board:
(a)

Textiles – fire retardant clothing and other work apparel;

(b)

Prefabricated buildings;

(c)

Bridges, bridge sections, towers and lattice masts, or iron or steel;

(d)

Steam turbines and other vapour turbines; hydraulic turbines and water wheels;
gas turbines other than turbo-jets and turbo-propellers;

(e)

Electrical transformers, static converters and inductors;

(f)

Electricity distribution or control apparatus;

(g)

Parts of electricity distribution or control apparatus;

(h)

Co-axial cable and other co-axial electrical conductors;

(i)

Other electric conductors, for a voltage exceeding 1000V;

(j)

Gates;

(k)

Woodpoles and crossarms; or

(l)

Generators.

407

ANNEX 19-5
Services
1.

Unless otherwise specified, this Chapter covers the services specified in paragraph 2
and 3. The subject matter of construction services is addressed in Annex 19-6. The
services listed in this Annex and Annex 19-6 are identified in accordance with the
CPC.

2.

This Annex covers procurement of the following services by central entities covered
in Annex 19-1 and Section A of Annex 19-3:

3.

861

Legal services (advisory services of foreign and international law
only)

862

Accounting, auditing and book-keeping services

This Annex covers procurement of the following services by entities covered in
Annexes 19-1 and 19-2, and Section A of 19-3:
CPC Reference

Description

633

Repair services of personal and household goods

7512

Commercial courier services (including multi-modal)

7523

Electronic data interchange (EDI)

7523

Electronic mail

7523

Enhanced/value-added facsimile services, including store and
forward, store and retrieve Code and protocol conversion

7523

On-line information and data base retrieval

7523

Voice mail

822

Real estate services on a fee or contract basis

841

Consultancy services related to the installation of computer
hardware

842

Software implementation services, including systems and software
consulting services, systems analysis, design, programming and
maintenance services

843

Data processing services, including processing, tabulation and
facilities management services

843

On-line information and/or data processing (including transaction

408

processing)
844

Data base services

845

Maintenance and repair services of office machinery and equipment
including computers

849

Other computer services

86501

General management consulting services

86503

Marketing management consulting services

86504

Human resources management consulting services

86505

Production management consulting services

866

Services related to management consulting (except 86602 Arbitration
and conciliation services)

8671

Architectural services

8672

Engineering services

8673

Integrated engineering services (excluding 86731 Integrated
engineering services for transportation infrastructure turnkey
projects)

8674

Urban planning and landscape architectural services

8676

Technical testing and analysis services including quality control and
inspection (except with reference to FSC 58 and transportation
equipment)

874

Building-cleaning services

8861 to 8864
and 8866
94

Repair services incidental to metal products, machinery and
equipment
Sewage and refuse disposal, sanitation and similar services

Notes to Canada’s Annex 19-5:
1.

This Chapter does not cover procurement of the following:
(a)

all services, with reference to those goods purchased by the Department of
National Defence, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the Department of
Fisheries and Oceans for the Canadian Coast Guard, the Canadian Air
Transport Security Authority, and provincial and municipal police forces which
are not covered by Annex 19-4; and

(b)

services procured in support of military forces located overseas.

409

2.

This Chapter does not apply to instruments of monetary policy, exchange rates,
public debt, reserve management or other policies involving transactions in securities
or other financial instruments, in particular transactions by the contracting authorities
to raise money or capital. Accordingly, this Chapter does not apply to contracts
relating to the issue, purchase, sale or transfer of securities or other financial
instruments. Central bank services are also excluded.

3.

For procuring entities included in Annex 19-2, the thresholds will be SDR 355,000
when an entity procures consulting services regarding matters of a confidential
nature, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to compromise
government confidences, cause economic disruption or similarly be contrary to
public interest.

4.

For the Province of Québec, this Annex does not cover procurement from a nonprofit organisation with respect to urban planning, as well as resulting plans and
specifications preparation and works management, provided that the non-profit
organisation respects, for its procurement, the procuring entity’s obligations under
this Chapter.

5.

For the Province of Québec, this Annex does not cover procurement of the following
services by Hydro-Québec (identified in accordance with the CPC):
84 – Computer and related services
86724 – Engineering design services for the construction of civil engineering works
86729 – Other engineering services.

6.

For the Province of Manitoba, this Annex does not cover procurement of services by
Manitoba Hydro Electric Board.

410

ANNEX 19-6
Construction services
1.

Unless otherwise specified, this Chapter covers all construction services identified in
Division 51 of the CPC.

2.

Construction services contracts awarded by entities in Annexes 19-1 and 19-2, and
Section A of Annex 19-3, which involve, as complete or partial consideration, any
grant to the supplier of the construction service, for a specified period of time, of
temporary ownership or a right to control and operate the civil or building work
resulting from such contract, and demand payment for the use of such work for the
duration of the contract, are subject only to the following provisions: Articles 19.1,
19.2, 19.4, 19.5, 19.6 (except for subparagraphs 3 (e) and (l)), 19.15 (except for
paragraphs 3 and 4) and 19.17.

3.

This Chapter does not include construction services contracts as described in
paragraph 2 that are awarded by procuring entities when carrying out activities listed
in Section B of Annex 19-3.

Notes to Canada’s Annex 19-6
1.

For central government entities in Annex 19-1, this Annex includes dredging
services, and dredging services that are incidental to construction services contracts,
subject to the following requirements:
(a)

(b)

2.

53

the vessel or other floating plant equipment used in the supply of the dredging
services:
(i)

is of Canadian or European Union make or manufacture; or

(ii)

has been predominantly modified in Canada or the European Union and
has been owned by a person located in Canada or the European Union for
at least a year prior to the submission of the tender by the bidder; and

the vessel must be registered in:
(i)

Canada; or

(ii)

a Member State of the European Union and have been granted a
temporary licence under the Coasting Trade Act, S.C. 1992, c. 31. The
temporary license will be granted to the European Union vessel, subject
to applicable non-discretionary requirements.53 The requirement that a
temporary licence will only be issued if there is no Canadian duty or nonduty paid vessel available will not be applied to the application for that
temporary licence.

The Province of Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
favouring local outsourcing in the case of construction services contracts awarded by
Hydro-Québec. For greater certainty, such measure would in no case be a condition
for the participation or qualification of suppliers.

For greater certainty, the Coasting Trade Act does not impose nationality requirements on crew
members.

411

3.

For the Province of Manitoba, this Annex does not cover procurement of
construction services by Manitoba Hydro Electric Board.

412

ANNEX 19-7
General notes
1.

2.

This Chapter does not cover procurement:
(a)

in respect of shipbuilding and repair, including related architectural and
engineering services, for central entities in Annex 19-1 and Section A of
Annex 19-3; and for sub-central entities in British Columbia, Manitoba,
Newfoundland and Labrador, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward
Island, and Québec covered by Annex 19-2 and Section A of Annex 19-3;

(b)

in respect of agricultural goods made in furtherance of agricultural support
programs or human feeding programs;

(c)

of transportation services that form a part of, or are incidental to, a
procurement contract;

(d)

in relation to an international crossing between Canada and another country,
including the design, construction, operation or maintenance of the crossing as
well as any related infrastructure;

(e)

between subsidiaries or affiliates of the same entity, or between an entity and
any of its subsidiaries or affiliates, or between an entity and a general, limited
or special partnership in which the entity has a majority or controlling interest;
and

(f)

of goods purchased for representational or promotional purposes, or of services
or construction services purchased for representational or promotional purposes
outside the province, in respect of the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia,
Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Québec and
Saskatchewan;

(g)

of services contracts, excluding construction services contracts, which grant to
a supplier the right to provide and exploit a service to the public as complete or
partial consideration for the delivery of a service under a procurement contract;

(h)

for the acquisition, development, production or co-production of programme
material by broadcasters and contracts for broadcasting time;

(i)

by Québec entities of works of art from local artists or to procurement by any
municipality, academic institution or school board of other provinces and
territories with respect to cultural industries. For the purpose of this
paragraph, works of art includes specific artistic works to be integrated into a
public building or a site;

(j)

by procuring entities included in Annexes 19-1 and 19-2, and Section A of
Annex 19-3 in connection with activities in the fields of drinking water,
energy, transport and the postal sector, unless such contracts are covered by
Section B of Annex 19-3;

(k)

subject to the Northwest Territories Business Incentive Policy; and

(l)

subject to the Nunavummi Nangminiqaqtunik Ikajuuti Policy (NNI Policy).

This Chapter does not apply to:

413

3.

4.

(a)

any measure adopted or maintained with respect to Aboriginal peoples, nor to
set asides for aboriginal businesses; existing aboriginal or treaty rights of any
of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada protected by section 35 of the Constitution
Act, 1982 are not affected by this Chapter; and

(b)

any measure adopted or maintained by Québec with respect to cultural
industries.

For greater certainty, this Chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the
following:
(a)

procurement in terms of Canadian coverage is defined as contractual
transactions to acquire goods or services for the direct benefit or use of the
government. The procurement process is the process that begins after an entity
has decided on its requirement and continues through to and including contract
award;

(b)

where a contract to be awarded by an entity is not covered by this Chapter,
Canada’s Annexes to its Market Access Schedule shall not be construed to
cover any good or service component of that contract;

(c)

any exclusion that is related either specifically or generally to central or
sub-central entities or enterprises covered by Annexes 19-1 or 19-2, or Section
A of Annex 19-3 will also apply to any successor entity or entities, enterprise
or enterprises, in such a manner as to maintain the value of the coverage of
Canada’s Annexes to its Market Access Schedule for this Chapter;

(d)

services covered by this Chapter are subject to Canada's exclusions from and
reservations to Chapters Eight (Investment), Nine (Cross-Border Trade in
Services) and Thirteen (Financial Services);

(e)

this Chapter does not cover procurement by a procuring entity on behalf of
another entity where the procurement would not be covered by this Chapter if
it were conducted by the other entity itself; and

(f)

this Chapter does not cover procurement by a procuring entity from a
government entity.

Regional Economic Development
(a)

the provinces and territories of Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, New
Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Northwest Territories, Nunavut, Prince Edward
Island, or Yukon may derogate from this Chapter in order to promote regional
economic development, without providing undue support to monopolistic
activities.

(b)

any procurement qualifying for a derogation pursuant to this Note shall:

(c)

(i)

be of a total value estimated at CAD$ one million, or less; and

(ii)

support small firms or employment opportunities in non-urban areas.

if the procurement meets the requirement of paragraph (b)(ii) but its total value
exceeds CAD$ one million, the value of the part of the contract that would be
affected by the derogation would not exceed CAD$ one million.

414

(d)

each province or territory listed under paragraph (a) may not derogate pursuant
to this Note more than ten times per year.

(e)

a procurement shall not qualify for a derogation pursuant to this Note if it is
funded by the federal government.

(f)

a procurement qualifying for a derogation pursuant to this Note shall be
notified at least 30 days prior to the signing of a procurement contract,
accompanied by:
(i)

the details of the circumstances justifying a derogation pursuant to this
Note;

(ii)

the information regarding the area where the procurement is expected to
provide regional economic benefits, and, if made available, the name of
the supplier; and

(iii) an explanation of the conformity of the procurement with the
requirements of this Note.

415

ANNEX 19-8
Publication media
Section A:
Electronic or paper media utilised for the publication of laws, regulations, judicial decisions,
administrative rulings of general application, standard contract clauses, and procedures
regarding government procurement covered by this Chapter pursuant to Article 19.5
1.

CANADA
1.1

Government entities and Crown corporations:
1.

2.

3.

2.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

Statutes of Canada: http://laws.justice.gc.ca/

(b)

Canada Gazette: http://www.gazette.gc.ca

Judicial decisions:
(a)

Supreme Court Judgments: http://scc.lexum.org/decisia-scccsc/scc-csc/scc-csc/en/2013/nav_date.do

(b)

Federal Court Reports: http://reports.fja-cmf.gc.ca/eng/index.html

(c)

Federal Court of Appeal http://www.fca-caf.gc.ca

(d)

Canadian International Trade Tribunal: http://www.citt-tcce.gc.ca

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

Government Electronic Tendering System (GETS):
https://buyandsell.gc.ca/

(b)

Canada Gazette http://www.gazette.gc.ca

(c)

Contracting Policy: http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pol/doceng.aspx?id=14494&section=text

PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
2.1

Alberta
1.

2.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

Alberta Acts, Regulations and Codes:
http://www.qp.alberta.ca/Laws_Online.cfm

(b)

Alberta Gazette: http://www.qp.alberta.ca/Alberta_Gazette.cfm

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

Administrative rulings:
(a)

2.2

Alberta Justice – Alberta Courts:
http://www.albertacourts.ab.ca/index.php?p=169
http://www.canlii.org/en/ab/

British Columbia
1.

Laws and regulations:
416

(a)
2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

http://www.courts.gov.bc.ca/index.aspx

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

2.3

http://www.bclaws.ca/

http://www.courts.gov.bc.ca/index.aspx

Manitoba
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

(e)

http://www.manitobacourts.mb.ca/

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

4.

Manitoba Gazette : http://web2.gov.mb.ca/laws/index.php

http://www.gov.mb.ca/tenders

Municipalities, municipal organisations:
(a)

City of Winnipeg: http://www.winnipeg.ca/matmgt/info.stm

(b)

City of Brandon: http://brandon.ca/search?q=procurement; and
http://brandon.ca/purchasing-and-tenders/conducting-businesswith-purchasing services?highlight=WyJwcm9jdXJlbWVudCJd

(c)

City of Thompson: http://www.thompson.ca/index.aspx?page=96

(d)

City of Steinbach: http://www.steinbach.ca/home

City of Portage La Prairie: http://www.city.portage-la-prairie.mb.ca5.
Publicly-funded academic, health, and social service entities:
(a)

Red River College: http://www.rrc.ca/

(b)

Regional Health Authorities of Manitoba:
http://www.rham.mb.ca/rhampp.html

(c)

University of Brandon: https://www.brandonu.ca/finance/facultystaff-resources/purchasing-department/; and
https://www.brandonu.ca/vp-finance/files/Purchasing-Manualrevised-October-2012.pdf

(d)

University College of the North: https://www.ucn.ca/defaulted.aspx

(e)

University of Manitoba:
http://www.umanitoba.ca/admin/governance/governing_documents
/financial/392.html

(f)

University of Winnipeg http://www.uwinnipeg.ca/index/cmsfilesystemaction/pdfs/admin/policies/purchasing%20procedures%2004-0113.pdf

(g)

Winnipeg Regional Health Authority:
http://www.wrha.mb.ca/about/busopp/contracting.php
417

6.

School boards:
(a)

Beautiful Plains: http://www.beautifulplainssd.ca/

(b)

Border Land:
http://www.blsd.ca/Board/boardpolicies/Pages/default.aspx

(c)

Division scolaire franco-manitobaine:
https://www.dsfm.mb.ca/SiteWeb2010/documents/La%20CSFM/D
irectives%202012/ADM%20%20administration/ADM%2019%20Appel%20d_offres.pdf

(d)

Evergreen: http://www.esd.ca/Parents-andCommunity/Documents/Administration%20Manual/5%20%20Business%20Administration/5.130%20Purchasing%20Proced
ure.pdf

(e)

Flin Flon: http://www.ffsd.mb.ca/pdf/policies/POLICY7~2.PDF

(f)

Fort La Bosse: http://www.flbsd.mb.ca/divisioninfo/policies#sectiond

(g)

Frontier
http://www.frontiersd.mb.ca/governance/policy/SitePages/Section
%20D%20-%20Business%20Administration.aspx; and
http://www.frontiersd.mb.ca/governance/policy/Documents/Section
%20D%20%20Business%20Administration/D.3.B%20Tenders%20(Policy%2
0and%20Regulation).pdf

(h)

Garden Valley:
http://www.gvsd.ca/images/PDF/Policies/POLICY_MANUAL_1.p
df

(i)

Hanover: http://hsd.ca/board/division-policies/

(j)

Interlake: http://www.isd21.mb.ca/

(k)

Kelsey: http://www.ksd.mb.ca

(l)

Lakeshore: http://www.lakeshoresd.mb.ca/regulations-andprocedures

(m) Lord Selkirk:
http://www.lssd.ca/division/policy_documents/pdfs/B16%20Purchasing.pdf
(n)

Louis Riel: https://www.lrsd.net/leadership/administrativeguidelines/

(o)

Manitoba Institute of Trade and Technology (formerly Winnipeg
Tech. College): www.mitt.ca

(p)

Mountain View:
http://www.mvsd.ca/governance.cfm?subpage=435

418

(q)

Mystery Lake:
http://www.mysterynet.mb.ca/images/stories/Docs/boardpolicyRev
May2015.pdf

(r)

Park West:
http://www.pwsd.ca/Policies/Section%205/Section%205.html

(s)

Pembina Trails:
http://www.pembinatrails.ca/community/divisionalpolicies/html

(t)

Pine Creek: http://www.pinecreeksd.mb.ca/section-d-fiscalmanagement.html

(u)

Portage la Prairie: http://www.plpsd.mb.ca/board-andgovernance/policies/d

(v)

Prairie Rose: http://www.prsdmb.ca/policies-d/

(w) Prairie Spirit : https://sites.google.com/a/prspirit.org/prairie-spirit5/division/policy-manual
(x)

Public Schools Finance Board:
http://www.edu.gov.mb.ca/k12/finance/

(y)

Red River Valley: http://rrvsd.ca/wpcontent/uploads/2015/09/DJB-Purchasing-Procedures.pdf

(z)

River East Transcona:
http://www.retsd.mb.ca/yourretsd/Policies/Documents/DJB.pdf

(aa) Rolling River:
http://www.rrsd.mb.ca/governance/PolicyManual/Pages/default.asp
x
(bb) Seine River :http://www.srsd.mb.ca/PolMan/DJ_REG.pdf
(cc) Seven Oaks: http://www.7oaks.org/News/Pages/Tenders.aspx
(dd) Southwest Horizon:
http://www.shmb.ca/images/stories/AdministrativeManual/Section2/purchasing%20procedures.pdf
(ee) St. James-Assiniboia: http://polmanual.sjsd.net/?p=Section D Fiscal Management/
(ff)

Sunrise:
http://www.sunrisesd.ca/OperationalDepartments/Pages/default.asp
x

(gg) Swan Valley: http://www.svsd.ca/svsd/policiesnum.htm
(hh) Turtle Mountain: http://www.tmsd.mb.ca/procedures/D/D-10.pdf
(ii)

Turtle River:
http://trsd32.mb.ca/TRSD/PDF's/TRSDPolicies/Administration.pdf

(jj)

Western:
http://www.westernsd.mb.ca/index.php?option=com_phocadownlo

419

ad&view=category&id=61:section-d-fiscalmanagement&Itemid=73#
(kk) Whiteshell: http://www.sdwhiteshell.mb.ca/
(ll)
7.

2.4

Crown corporations:
(a)

Manitoba Hydro:
https://www.hydro.mb.ca/selling_to_mh/selling_index.shtml?WT.
mc_id=2030

(b)

Manitoba Liquor and Lotteries: www.merx.com; and
www.winnipegconstruction.ca (construction only)

New Brunswick
1.

2.

3.

2.5

Winnipeg: https://www.winnipegsd.ca/Pages/Bids-andTenders.aspx

Laws and regulations:
(a)

New Brunswick Acts and Regulations:
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/departments/attorney_general/a
cts_regulations.html

(b)

The Royal Gazette:
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/departments/attorney_general/r
oyal_gazette/content/

Judicial decisions:
(a)

The New Brunswick Reports:
http://www.mlb.nb.ca/html/canadian-case-law-search.php; and
https://www.canlii.org/en/nb/

(b)

Dominion Law Reports: http://www.carswell.com/productdetail/dominion-law-reports-4th-series/

(c)

Supreme Court Reports: http://www.scc-csc.gc.ca/

(d)

National Reporter: http://www.mlb.nb.ca/site/catalog/nr.htm

Administrative Rulings and Procedures:
(a)

New Brunswick Opportunities Network: http://www.gnb.ca/tenders

(b)

Réseau de possibilités d’affaires du Nouveau-Brunswick:
http://www.gnb.ca/soumissions.

Newfoundland and Labrador
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca
http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca
420

2.6

Northwest Territories
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

http://www.contractregistry.nt.ca/Public/PublicHome.asp

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

2.7

http://www.contractregistry.nt.ca/Public/PublicHome.asp

http://www.contractregistry.nt.ca/Public/PublicHome.asp

Nova Scotia
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

Office of the Legislative Counsel: http://nslegislature.ca

(b)

The Registry of Regulations http://www.gov.ns.ca/just/regulations/
and
http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

2.8

The Courts of Nova Scotia: http://www.courts.ns.ca/
http://www.novascotia.ca/tenders/

Nunavut
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)http://www.justice.gov.nu.ca/apps/authoring/dspPage.aspx?page=STA
TUTES+AND+REGULATIONS+PAGE

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

http://www.canlii.org/en/nu/

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

NNI Contracting Appeals Board Annual Report:
http://nni.gov.nu.ca/documents

(b)

GN Policies and Procedures on procurement practices are available
at:
http://www.gov.nu.ca/sites/default/files/files/Procurement%20Proc
edures.pdf and
http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca

2.9

Ontario
1.

2.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

Statutes and Regulations of Ontario: http://www.ontario.ca/laws

(b)

The Ontario Gazette: http://www.ontario.ca/ontario-gazette

Judicial decisions:
421

(a)
3.

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

4.

http://www.doingbusiness.mgs.gov.on.ca/

School boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities; municipalities; and all provincial and municipal governmentowned entities of a commercial or industrial nature:
(a)

5.

http://www.ontariocourts.ca/decisions_index/en/

http://www.marcan.net/en/on/index.php

Hydro One:
http://www.hydroone.com/DoingBusiness/Pages/default.aspx

6.

Ontario Power Generation: http://www.opg.com/working-withopg/suppliers/supply-chain/Pages/Become%20a%20Supplier.aspx

2.10 Prince Edward Island
1.

2.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

http://www.gov.pe.ca/law/regulations/index.php3

(b)

The Royal Gazette of Prince Edward Island

Judicial decisions:
(a)http://www.gov.pe.ca/courts/supreme/index.php3?number=1000150&l
ang=E

3.

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

http://www.gov.pe.ca/finance/index.php3?number=1041973

2.11 Québec
1.

2.

3.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

Publications du Québec:
http://www3.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/loisreglements.fr.ht
ml

(b)

Gazette officielle du Québec :
http://www3.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/gazetteofficielle.fr.h
tm

Judicial decisions:
(a)

Annuaire de jurisprudence et de doctrine du Québec

(b)

Jurisprudence Express (J.E.)

(c)

Jugements.qc.ca: http://www.jugements.qc.ca/

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

Publications du Québec:
http://www3.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/loisreglements.fr.ht
ml

422

(b)

Gazette officielle du Québec:
http://www3.publicationsduquebec.gouv.qc.ca/gazetteofficielle.fr.h
tml

(c)

Site internet du Secrétariat du Conseil du trésor :
http://www.tresor.gouv.qc.ca/fr/faire-affaire-avec-letat/lesmarches-publics/)http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca

2.12 Saskatchewan
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

Queen's Printer: http://www.publications.gov.sk.ca
Queen's Bench: http://www.sasklawcourts.ca

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

SaskTenders: www.sasktenders.ca

2.13 Yukon
1.

Laws and regulations:
(a)

2.

Judicial decisions:
(a)

3.

http://www.gov.yk.ca/legislation/index.html
http://www.yukoncourts.ca/

Administrative rulings and procedures:
(a)

http://www.hpw.gov.yk.ca/selling/bidchallenge.html

Section B:
Electronic or paper media utilised for the publication of notices required by Articles 19.6,
19.8.7 and 19.15.2 pursuant to Article 19.5
1.

CANADA
1.1

2.

Government entities and Crown corporations:
1.

Government Electronic Tendering System (GETS):
https://buyandsell.gc.ca/procurement-data/tenders

2.

MERX, Cebra Inc.: http://www.merx.ca

PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
2.1

Alberta
1.

2.2

British Columbia
1.

2.3

Alberta Purchasing Connection: http://www.purchasingconnection.ca
BC Bid: http://www.bcbid.gov.bc.ca

Manitoba
1.

Provincial:
(a)

http://www.gov.mb.ca/tenders
423

2.

3.

4.

Municipalities, municipal organisations:
(a)

City of Winnipeg: http://www.winnipeg.ca/matmgt/bidopp.asp

(b)

City of Brandon: http://brandon.ca/purchasing-a-tenders

(c)

City of Steinbach:
http://www.steinbach.ca/city_services/tender_opportunities/

(d)

City of Portage La Prairie: http://www.cityplap.com/main/category/opportunities/; and
http://www.rfp.ca/organization/City-of-Portage-la-Prairie

(e)

City of Thompson: http://www.thompson.ca/index.aspx?page=229

Publicly-funded academic, health and social services entities:
(a)

University of Manitoba:
http://umanitoba.ca/admin/financial_services/purch/bid_opportuniti
es.html; and https://www.biddingo.com/

(b)

University of Winnipeg: https://www.merx.com/

(c)

University of Brandon: http://www.rfp.ca/organization/BrandonUniversity

(d)

Red River College: www.merx.com

(e)

University College of the North: www.merx.com

(f)

Winnipeg Regional Health Authority:
http://www.wrha.mb.ca/about/busopp/bids.php

(g)

Regional Health Authorities of Manitoba:
www.healthprocanada.com; and www.biddingo.com

School boards:
(a)

Beautiful Plains: http://www.beautifulplainssd.ca/

(b)

Border Land: http://www.blsd.ca/About/tenders/Pages/default.aspx

(c)

Brandon: https://www.bsd.ca/Division/tenders/Pages/default.aspx

(d)

Division scolaire franco-manitobaine: www.MERX.com

(e)

Evergreen: http://www.esd.ca/Programs/Pages/Maintenance-andTransportation.aspx

(f)

Flin Flon: http://www.ffsd.mb.ca

(g)

Fort La Bosse: http://www.flbsd.mb.ca/

(h)

Frontier:
http://www.frontiersd.mb.ca/resources/Pages/bidopportunities.aspx

(i)

Garden Valley: http://www.gvsd.ca

(j)

Hanover: www.merx.com

(k)

Interlake: http://www.isd21.mb.ca/request_for_proposals.html

(l)

Kelsey: http://www.ksd.mb.ca
424

(m) Lord Selkirk: http://www.lssd.ca/(n)
www.merx.com

Lakeshore:

(o)

Louis Riel: www.merx.com

(p)

Mountain View: http://www.mvsd.ca/index.cfm

(q)

Mystery Lake: http://www.mysterynet.mb.ca

(r)

Park West: http://www.pwsd.ca/home.html

(s)

Pembina Trails:
http://www.pembinatrails.ca/board_administration/open_tenders.ht
ml

(t)

Pine Creek: http://www.pinecreeksd.mb.ca

(u)

Portage la Prairie: http://www.plpsd.mb.ca/

(v)

Prairie Rose: http://www.prsdmb.ca/

(w) Prairie Spirit: https://sites.google.com/a/prspirit.org/prairie-spirit5/employment/tenders-and-rfp
(x)

Red River Valley: http://rrvsd.ca/

(y)

River East Transcona: www.merx.com

(z)

Rolling River:
http://www.rrsd.mb.ca/governance/PolicyManual/Pages/default.asp
x

(aa) Seine River: http://www.srsd.mb.ca/
(bb) Seven Oaks: http://www.7oaks.org/News/Pages/Tenders.aspx; and
www.merx.com
(cc) Southwest Horizon: http://www.shmb.ca/
(dd) St. James-Assiniboia: www.merx.com
(ee) Sunrise:
http://www.sunrisesd.ca/OperationalDepartments/Purchasing/Propo
sals%20and%20Tenders/Pages/default.aspx
(ff)

Swan Valley: http://www.svsd.ca/

(gg) Turtle Mountain: http://www.tmsd.mb.ca
(hh) Turtle River: http://trsd32.mb.ca
(ii)

Western: http://www.westernsd.mb.ca/

(jj)

Whiteshell: http://www.sdwhiteshell.mb.ca/

(kk) Winnipeg: https://www.winnipegsd.ca/Pages/Bids-andTenders.aspx
(ll)

Manitoba Institute of Trades and Technology (formerly Winnipeg
Tech. College): www.mitt.ca

425

(mm) Public Schools Finance Board:
http://www.plansource.ca/Portals/61984/spr/wca.htm
5.

Crown corporations:
(a)

Manitoba Hydro:
http://www.merx.com/English/Nonmember.asp?WCE=Show&TA
B=3&PORTAL=MERX&State=1&hcode=ZnHb9N%2fychQhquB
6o2pU2g%3d%3d

(b)
2.4

2.5

New Brunswick
1.

New Brunswick Opportunities Network: https://nbonrpanb.gnb.ca/welcome?language=En

2.

Réseau de possibilités d’affaires du Nouveau-Brunswick:
http://www.gnb.ca/soumissions

Newfoundland and Labrador
1.

2.6

Procurement Services : http://www.novascotia.ca/tenders/

Nunavut
1.

2.9

Contract Registry:
http://www.contractregistry.nt.ca/Public/PublicHome.asp

Nova Scotia
1.

2.8

Information available on Internet homepage, Government Purchasing
Agency: http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca/index.html

Northwest Territories
1.

2.7

Manitoba Liquor and Lotteries: www.merx.com; and
www.winnipegconstruction.ca (construction only)

http://www.nunavuttenders.ca/

Ontario
1.

https://ontariotenders.bravosolution.com/esop/nachost/public/web/login.html

2.

School boards and publicly-funded academic, health and social service
entities; Municipalities; and all provincial and municipal governmentowned entities of a commercial or industrial nature:
(a)

3.

http://www.marcan.net/en/on/index.php

Hydro One: http://www.hydroone.com/DoingBusiness/Pages/default.aspx

4. Ontario Power Generation: http://www.opg.com/working-withopg/suppliers/supply-chain/Pages/Become%20a%20Supplier.aspx
2.10 Prince Edward Island
1.

http://www.gov.pe.ca/finance/index.php3?number=1041973

2.11 Québec

426

1.

Procurement notices (Article 19.6), requests for qualification, the names
of suppliers that are selected in the context of a delivery order contract or
a task order contract, and information that relates to awards (Article
19.15.2) are published by SEAO, the electronic tendering system
approved by the Government of Québec (http://www.seao.ca).

2.

In Québec, according to the regulations, a multi-purpose list can be used
only in the context of a procedure to qualify a supplier (Article 19.8.7).

2.12 Saskatchewan
1.

SaskTenders: www.sasktenders.ca

2.13 Yukon
1.

http://www.gov.yk.ca/tenders/tms.html

2.

http://www.hpw.gov.yk.ca/tenders/index.html

Section C:
Website address or addresses where Parties publish procurement statistics pursuant to Article
19.15.5 and notices concerning awarded contracts pursuant to Article 19.15.6
1.

CANADA
1.1

2.

Government entities and Crown corporations:
1.

Purchasing Activity Report: http://www.tbssct.gc.ca/pubs_pol/dcgpubs/con_data/siglist-eng.asp

2.

Government Electronic Tendering System (GETS):
https://buyandsell.gc.ca/

PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
2.1

Alberta
1.

2.2

British Columbia
1.

2.3

2.4

2.5

http://www.bcbid.gov.bc.ca

Manitoba
1.

http://www.gov.mb.ca/tenders

2.

http://www.merx.com

New Brunswick
1.

http://www.gnb.ca/tenders

2.

http://www.gnb.ca/soumissions

Newfoundland and Labrador
1.

2.6

http://www.purchasingconnection.ca

http://www.gpa.gov.nl.ca

Northwest Territories
1.

http://www.contractregistry.nt.ca/Public/PublicHome.asp

427

2.7

Nova Scotia
1.

2.8

2.9

http://www.novascotia.ca/tenders/

Nunavut
1.

http://www.nunavuttenders.ca/

2.

http://www.gov.nu.ca/eia/programs-services/information-businesses

Ontario
1.

http://www.doingbusiness.mgs.gov.on.ca/

2.10 Prince Edward Island
1.

http://www.gov.pe.ca/finance/index.php3?number=1041973

2.11 Québec
1.

Statistiques sur les acquisitions gouvernementales:
http://www.tresor.gouv.qc.ca/faire-affaire-avecletat/publications/statistiques-sur-les-acquisitions-gouvernementales/

2.

Avis concernant les marchés adjugés Système électronique d'appel
d'offres approuvé par le gouvernement du Québec SEAO
(http://www.seao.ca)

2.12 Saskatchewan
1.

www.sasktenders.ca

2.13 Yukon
1.

http://www.gov.yk.ca/tenders/tms.html

2.

http://www.hpw.gov.yk.ca/registry/

428

MARKET ACCESS SCHEDULE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION
ANNEX 19-1
Central government entities which procure in accordance with the provisions of the
Chapter
Goods
Specified in Annex 19-4
Thresholds

SDR 130,000

Services
Specified in Annex 19-5
Thresholds

SDR 130,000

Construction services and works concessions
Specified in Annex 19-6
Thresholds

SDR 5,000,000

Section A: European Union entities
1.

The Council of the European Union

2.

The European Commission

3.

European External Action Service (EEAS)

Section B: The central government contracting authorities of European Union Member
States
(Note: this list is exhaustive)
BELGIUM
1.

Services publics fédéraux:

1.

Federale Overheidsdiensten:

SPF Chancellerie du Premier Ministre

FOD Kanselarij van de Eerste Minister

SPF Personnel et Organisation

FOD Kanselarij Personeel en Organisatie

SPF Budget et Contrôle de la Gestion

FOD Budget en Beheerscontrole

SPF Technologie de l'Information et de la
Communication (Fedict)

FOD Informatie- en Communicatietechnologie
(Fedict)

SPF Affaires étrangères, Commerce extérieur et
Coopération au Développement

FOD Buitenlandse Zaken, Buitenlandse Handel en
Ontwikkelingssamenwerking

SPF Intérieur

FOD Binnenlandse Zaken

SPF Finances

FOD Financiën

SPF Mobilité et Transports

FOD Mobiliteit en Vervoer

SPF Emploi, Travail et Concertation sociale

FOD Werkgelegenheid, Arbeid en sociaal overleg

429

SPF Sécurité Sociale et Institutions publiques de
Sécurité Sociale

FOD Sociale Zekerheid en Openbare Instellingen
van sociale Zekerheid

SPF Santé publique, Sécurité de la Chaîne
alimentaire et Environnement

FOD Volksgezondheid, Veiligheid van de
Voedselketen en Leefmilieu

SPF Justice

FOD Justitie

SPF Economie, PME, Classes moyennes et
Energie
Ministère de la Défense

FOD Economie, KMO, Middenstand en Energie

Service public de programmation Intégration
sociale, Lutte contre la pauvreté Et Economie
sociale

Programmatorische Overheidsdienst
Maatschappelijke Integratie, Armoedsbestrijding
en sociale Economie

Service public fédéral de Programmation
Développement durable

Programmatorische federale Overheidsdienst
Duurzame Ontwikkeling

Service public fédéral de Programmation
Politique scientifique

Programmatorische federale Overheidsdienst
Wetenschapsbeleid

2.

2.

Ministerie van Landsverdediging

Régie des Bâtiments:

Regie der Gebouwen:

Office national de Sécurité sociale

Rijksdienst voor sociale Zekerheid

Institut national d'Assurance sociales Pour
travailleurs indépendants

Rijksinstituut voor de sociale Verzekeringen der
Zelfstandigen

Institut national d'Assurance Maladie-Invalidité;
Office national des Pensions

Rijksinstituut voor Ziekte- en
Invaliditeitsverzekering; Rijksdienst voor
Pensioenen

Caisse auxiliaire d'Assurance Maladie-Invalidité

Hulpkas voor Ziekte-en Invaliditeitsverzekering

Fond des Maladies professionnelles

Fonds voor Beroepsziekten

Office national de l'Emploi

Rijksdienst voor Arbeidsvoorziening

La Poste54

De Post2

BULGARIA
1.

Администрация на Народното събрание (Administration of the National
Assembly)

2.

Администрация на Президента (Administration of the President)

3.

Администрация на Министерския съвет (Administration of the Council of
Ministers)

4.

Конституционен съд (Constitutional Court)

5.

Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank)

6.

Министерство на външните работи (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

7.

Министерство на вътрешните работи (Ministry of the Interior)

54

Postal activities as per act of 24 December 1993.

430

8.

Министерство на извънредните ситуации (Ministry of Еmergency Situations)

9.

Министерство на държавната администрация и административната реформа
(Ministry of State Administration and Administrative Reform)

10.

Министерство на земеделието и храните (Ministry of Agriculture and Food)

11.

Министерство на здравеопазването (Ministry of Health)

12.

Министерство на икономиката и енергетиката (Ministry of Economy and Energy)

13.

Министерство на културата (Ministry of Culture)

14.

Министерство на образованието и науката (Ministry of Education and Science)

15.

Министерство на околната среда и водите (Ministry of Environment and Water)

16.

Министерство на отбраната (Ministry of Defence)

17.

Министерство на правосъдието (Ministry of Justice)

18.

Министерство на регионалното развитие и благоустройството (Ministry of
Regional Development and Public Works)

19.

Министерство на транспорта (Ministry of Transport)

20.

Министерство на труда и социалната политика (Ministry of Labour and Social
Policy)

21.

Министерство на финансите (Ministry of Finance)

22.

държавни агенции, държавни комисии, изпълнителни агенции и други
държавни институции, създадени със закон или с постановление на
Министерския съвет, които имат функции във връзка с осъществяването на
изпълнителната власт (state agencies, state commissions, executive agencies and
other state authorities established by law or by Council of Ministers' decree having a
function relating to the exercise of executive power):

23.

Агенция за ядрено регулиране (Nuclear Regulatory Agency)

24.

Държавна комисия за енергийно и водно регулиране (Energy and Water State
Regulatory Commission)

25.

Държавна комисия по сигурността на информацията (State Commission on
Information Security)

26.

Комисия за защита на конкуренцията (Commission for Protection of Competition)

27.

Комисия за защита на личните данни (Commission for Personal Data Protection)

28.

Комисия за защита от дискриминация (Commission for Protection Against
Discrimination)

29.

Комисия за
Commission)

30.

Комисия за финансов надзор (Financial Supervision Commission)

31.

Патентно ведомство на Република България (Patent Office of the Republic of
Bulgaria)

регулиране

на

съобщенията

431

(Communications

Regulation

32.

Сметна палата на Република България (National Audit Office of the Republic of
Bulgaria)

33.

Агенция за приватизация (Privatization Agency)

34.

Агенция за следприватизационен контрол (Agency for Post-privatization Control)

35.

Български институт по метрология (Bulgarian Institute for Metrology)

36.

Държавна агенция "Архиви (State Agency "Archives")

37.

Държавна агенция "Държавен резерв и военновременни запаси" (State Agency
"State Reserve and War-Time Stocks")

38.

Държавна агенция за бежанците (State Agency for Refugees)

39.

Държавна агенция за българите в чужбина (State Agency for Bulgarians Abroad)

40.

Държавна агенция за закрила на детето (State Agency for Child Protection)

41.

Държавна агенция за информационни технологии и съобщения (State Agency
for Information Technology and Communications)

42.

Държавна агенция за метрологичен и технически надзор (State Agency for
Metrological and Technical Surveillance)

43.

Държавна агенция за младежта и спорта (State Agency for Youth and Sports)

44.

Държавна агенция по туризма (State Agency for Tourism)

45.

Държавна комисия по стоковите борси и тържища (State Commission on
Commodity Exchanges and Market-places)

46.

Институт по публична администрация и европейска интеграция (Institute of
Public Administration and European Integration)

47.

Национален статистически институт (National Statistical Institute)

48.

Агенция "Митници" (Customs Agency)

49.

Агенция за държавна и финансова инспекция (Public Financial Inspection
Agency)

50.

Агенция за държавни вземания (State Receivables Collection Agency)

51.

Агенция за социално подпомагане (Social Assistance Agency)

52.

Държавна агенция "Национална сигурност" (State Agency "National Security")

53.

Агенция за хората с увреждания (Agency for Persons with Disabilities)

54.

Агенция по вписванията (Registry Agency)

55.

Агенция по енергийна ефективност (Energy Efficiency Agency)

56.

Агенция по заетостта (Employment Agency)

57.

Агенция по геодезия, картография и кадастър (Geodesy, Cartography and
Cadastre Agency)

58.

Агенция по обществени поръчки (Public Procurement Agency)

59.

Българска агенция за инвестиции (Bulgarian Investment Agency)

432

60.

Главна дирекция "Гражданска въздухоплавателна администрация" (General
Directorate "Civil Aviation Administration")

61.

Дирекция за национален строителен контрол (Directorate for National
Construction Supervision)

62.

Държавна комисия по хазарта (State Commission on Gambling)

63.

Изпълнителна агенция "Автомобилна администрация" (Executive Agency
"Automobile Administration")

64.

Изпълнителна агенция "Борба с градушките" (Executive Agency "Hail
Suppression")

65.

Изпълнителна агенция "Българска служба за акредитация" (Executive Agency
"Bulgarian Accreditation Service")

66.

Изпълнителна агенция "Главна инспекция по труда" (Executive Agency "General
Labour Inspectorate")

67.

Изпълнителна агенция "Железопътна администрация" (Executive Agency
"Railway Administration")

68.

Изпълнителна агенция "Морска администрация" (Executive Agency "Maritime
Administration")

69.

Изпълнителна агенция "Национален филмов център" (Executive Agency
"National Film Centre")

70.

Изпълнителна агенция "Пристанищна администрация" (Executive Agency "Port
Administration")

71.

Изпълнителна агенция "Проучване и поддържане на река Дунав" (Executive
Agency "Exploration and Maintenance of the Danube River")

72.

Фонд "Републиканска пътна инфраструктура" (National Infrastructure Fund)

73.

Изпълнителна агенция за икономически анализи и прогнози (Executive Agency
for Economic Analysis and Forecasting)

74.

Изпълнителна агенция за насърчаване на малките и средни предприятия
(Executive Agency for Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises)

75.

Изпълнителна агенция по лекарствата (Executive Agency on Medicines)

76.

Изпълнителна агенция по лозата и виното (Executive Agency on Vine and Wine)

77.

Изпълнителна агенция по околна среда (Executive Environment Agency)

78.

Изпълнителна агенция по почвените ресурси (Executive Agency on Soil
Resources)

79.

Изпълнителна агенция по рибарство и аквакултури (Executive Agency on
Fisheries and Aquaculture)

80.

Изпълнителна агенция по селекция и репродукция в животновъдството
(Executive Agency for Selection and Reproduction in Animal Husbandry)

81.

Изпълнителна агенция по сортоизпитване, апробация и семеконтрол (Executive
Agency for Plant Variety Testing, Field Inspection and Seed Control)
433

82.

Изпълнителна агенция по трансплантация (Transplantation Executive Agency)

83.

Изпълнителна агенция
Hydromelioration)

84.

Комисията за защита на потребителите (Commission for Consumer Protection)

85.

Контролно-техническата инспекция (Control Technical Inspectorate)

86.

Национална агенция за приходите (National Revenue Agency)

87.

Национална ветеринарномедицинска служба (National Veterinary Service)

88.

Национална служба за растителна защита (National Service for Plant Protection)

89.

Национална служба по зърното и фуражите (National Grain and Feed Service)

90.

Държавна агенция по горите (State Forestry Agency)

91.

Висшата атестационна комисия (Higher Attestation Commission)

92.

Национална агенция за оценяване и акредитация (National Evaluation and
Accreditation Agency)

93.

Националната агенция за професионално образование и обучение (National
Agency for Vocational Education and Training)

94.

Национална комисия за борба с трафика на хора (Bulgarian National AntiTrafficking Commission)

95.

Дирекция "Материално-техническо осигуряване и социално обслужване" на
Министерство на вътрешните работи (Directorate "Material-technical Ensuring
and Social Service" at the Ministry of the Interior)

96.

Дирекция "Оперативно издирване" на Министерство на вътрешните работи
(Directorate "Operative Investigation" at the Ministry of the Interior)

97.

Дирекция "Финансово-ресурсно осигуряване" на Министерство на вътрешните
работи (Directorate "Financial and Resource Ensuring" at the Ministry of the
Interior)

98.

Изпълнителна агенция "Военни клубове и информация" (Executive Agency
"Military Clubs and Information")

99.

Изпълнителна агенция "Държавна собственост на Министерството на
отбраната" (Executive Agency "State Property at the Ministry of Defence")

100.

Изпълнителна агенция "Изпитвания и контролни измервания на въоръжение,
техника и имущества"(Executive Agency "Testing and Control Measurements of
Arms, Equipment and Property")

101.

Изпълнителна агенция "Социални дейности на Министерството на отбраната"
(Executive Agency "Social Activities at the Ministry of Defence")

102.

Национален център за информация и документация (National Center for
Information and Documentation)

103.

Национален център по радиобиология и радиационна защита (National Centre
for Radiobiology and Radiation Protection)

104.

Национална служба "Полиция" (National Office "Police")

по

хидромелиорации

434

(Executive

Agency

on

105.

Национална служба "Пожарна безопасност и защита на населението" (National
Office "Fire Safety and Protection of the Population")

106.

Национална служба за съвети в земеделието (National Agricultural Advisory
Service)

107.

Служба "Военна информация" (Military Information Service)

108.

Служба "Военна полиция" (Military Police)

109.

Авиоотряд 28 (Airsquad 28)
CZECH REPUBLIC

1.

Ministerstvo dopravy (Ministry of Transport)

2.

Ministerstvo financí (Ministry of Finance)

3.

Ministerstvo kultury (Ministry of Culture)

4.

Ministerstvo obrany (Ministry of Defence)

5.

Ministerstvo pro místní rozvoj (Ministry for Regional Development)

6.

Ministerstvo práce a sociálních věcí (Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs)

7.

Ministerstvo průmyslu a obchodu (Ministry of Industry and Trade)

8.

Ministerstvo spravedlnosti (Ministry of Justice)

9.

Ministerstvo školství, mládeže a tělovýchovy (Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports)

10.

Ministerstvo vnitra (Ministry of the Interior)

11.

Ministerstvo zahraničních věcí (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

12.

Ministerstvo zdravotnictví (Ministry of Health)

13.

Ministerstvo zemědělství (Ministry of Agriculture)

14.

Ministerstvo životního prostředí (Ministry of the Environment)

15.

Poslanecká sněmovna PČR (Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech
Republic)

16.

Senát PČR (Senate of the Parliament of the Czech Republic)

17.

Kancelář prezidenta (Office of the President)

18.

Český statistický úřad (Czech Statistical Office)

19.

Český úřad zeměměřičský a katastrální (Czech Office for Surveying, Mapping and
Cadastre)

20.

Úřad průmyslového vlastnictví (Industrial Property Office)

21.

Úřad pro ochranu osobních údajů (Office for Personal Data Protection)

22.

Bezpečnostní informační služba (Security Information Service)

23.

Národní bezpečnostní úřad (National Security Authority)

24.

Česká akademie věd (Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic)
435

25.

Vězeňská služba (Prison Service)

26.

Český báňský úřad (Czech Mining Authority)

27.

Úřad pro ochranu hospodářské soutěže (Office for the Protection of Competition)

28.

Správa státních hmotných rezerv (Administration of the State Material Reserves)

29.

Státní úřad pro jadernou bezpečnost (State Office for Nuclear Safety)

30.

Energetický regulační úřad (Energy Regulatory Office)

31.

Úřad vlády České republiky (Office of the Government of the Czech Republic)

32.

Ústavní soud (Constitutional Court)

33.

Nejvyšší soud (Supreme Court)

34.

Nejvyšší správní soud (Supreme Administrative Court)

35.

Nejvyšší státní zastupitelství (Supreme Public Prosecutor’s Office)

36.

Nejvyšší kontrolní úřad (Supreme Audit Office)

37.

Kancelář Veřejného ochránce práv (Office of the Public Defender of Rights)

38.

Grantová agentura České republiky (Grant Agency of the Czech Republic)

39.

Státní úřad inspekce práce (State Labour Inspection Office)

40.

Český telekomunikační úřad (Czech Telecommunication Office)

41.

Ředitelství silnic a dálnic ČR (ŘSD) (Road and Motorway Directorate of the Czech
Republic)
DENMARK

1.

Folketinget — The Danish Parliament Rigsrevisionen — The National Audit Office

2.

Statsministeriet — The Prime Minister's Office

3.

Udenrigsministeriet — Ministry of Foreign Affairs

4.

Beskæftigelsesministeriet — Ministry of Employment
5 styrelser og institutioner — 5 agencies and institutions

5.

Domstolsstyrelsen — The Court Administration

6.

Finansministeriet — Ministry of Finance
5 styrelser og institutioner — 5 agencies and institutions

7.

Forsvarsministeriet — Ministry of Defence
5 styrelser og institutioner — 5 agencies and Institutions

8.

Ministeriet for Sundhed og Forebyggelse — Ministry of the Interior and Health
Adskillige styrelser og institutioner, herunder Statens Serum Institut — Several
agencies and institutions, including Statens Serum Institut

9.

Justitsministeriet — Ministry of Justice
Rigspolitichefen, anklagemyndigheden samt 1 direktorat og et antal styrelser —
Commissioner of Police, 1 directorate and a number of agencies

10.

Kirkeministeriet — Ministry of Ecclesiastical Affairs
436

10 stiftsøvrigheder — 10 diocesan authorities
11.

Kulturministeriet — Ministry of Culture
4 styrelser samt et antal statsinstitutioner — A Department and a number of
institutions

12.

Miljøministeriet — Ministry of the Environment
5 styrelser — 5 agencies

13.

Ministeriet for Flygtninge, Invandrere og Integration — Ministry of Refugee,
Immigration and Integration Affairs
1 styrelse — 1 agency

14.

Ministeriet for Fødevarer, Landbrug og Fiskeri — Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Fisheries
4 direktorater og institutioner — 4 directorates and institutions

15.

Ministeriet for Videnskab, Teknologi og Udvikling — Ministry of Science,
Technology and Innovation
Adskillige styrelser og institutioner, Forskningscenter Risø og Statens
uddannelsesbygninger — Several agencies and institutions, including Risoe National
Laboratory and Danish National Research and Education Buildings

16.

Skatteministeriet — Ministry of Taxation
1 styrelse og institutioner — 1 agency and several institutions

17.

Velfærdsministeriet — Ministry of Welfare
3 styrelser og institutioner — 3 agencies and several institutions

18.

Transportministeriet — Ministry of Transport
7 styrelser og institutioner, herunder Øresundsbrokonsortiet — 7 agencies and
institutions, including Øresundsbrokonsortiet

19.

Undervisningsministeriet — Ministry of Education
3 styrelser, 4 undervisningsinstitutioner og 5 andre institutioner — 3 agencies, 4
educational establishments, 5 other institutions

20.

Økonomi- og Erhvervsministeriet — Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs
Adskillige styrelser og institutioner — Several agencies and institutions

21.

Klima- og Energiministeriet — Ministry for Climate and Energy
3 styrelser og institutioner — 3 agencies and institutions
GERMANY

1.

Federal Foreign Office

Auswärtiges Amt

2.

Federal Chancellery

Bundeskanzleramt

3.

Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs

Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales

4.

Federal Ministry of Education and Research

Bundesministerium für Bildung und
Forschung

5.

Federal Ministry for Food, Agriculture and
Consumer Protection

Bundesministerium für Ernährung,
Landwirtschaft und Verbraucherschutz

6.

Federal Ministry of Finance

Bundesministerium der Finanzen

437

7.

Federal Ministry of the Interior (civil goods
only)

Bundesministerium des Innern

8.

Federal Ministry of Health

Bundesministerium für Gesundheit

9.

Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior
Citizens, Women and Youth

Bundesministerium für Familie, Senioren,
Frauen und Jugend

10.

Federal Ministry of Justice

Bundesministerium der Justiz

11.

Federal Ministry of Transport, Building and
Urban Affairs

Bundesministerium für Verkehr, Bau und
Stadtentwicklung

12.

Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Technology

Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und
Technologie

13.

Federal Ministry for Economic Co-operation
and Development

Bundesministerium für wirtschaftliche
Zusammenarbeit und Entwicklung

14.

Federal Ministry of Defence

Bundesministerium der Verteidigung

15.

Federal Ministry of Environment, Nature
Conservation and Reactor Safety

Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz
und Reaktorsicherheit

ESTONIA
1.

Vabariigi Presidendi Kantselei (Office of the President of the Republic of Estonia)

2.

Eesti Vabariigi Riigikogu (Parliament of the Republic of Estonia)

3.

Eesti Vabariigi Riigikohus (Supreme Court of the Republic of Estonia)

4.

Riigikontroll (The State Audit Office of the Republic of Estonia)

5.

Õiguskantsler (Legal Chancellor)

6.

Riigikantselei (The State Chancellery)

7.

Rahvusarhiiv (The National Archives of Estonia)

8.

Haridus- ja Teadusministeerium (Ministry of Education and Research)

9.

Justiitsministeerium (Ministry of Justice)

10.

Kaitseministeerium (Ministry of Defence)

11.

Keskkonnaministeerium (Ministry of Environment)

12.

Kultuuriministeerium (Ministry of Culture)

13.

Majandus- ja Kommunikatsiooniministeerium (Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Communications)

14.

Põllumajandusministeerium (Ministry of Agriculture)

15.

Rahandusministeerium (Ministry of Finance)

16.

Siseministeerium (Ministry of Internal Affairs)

17.

Sotsiaalministeerium (Ministry of Social Affairs)

18.

Välisministeerium (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

19.

Keeleinspektsioon (The Language Inspectorate)
438

20.

Riigiprokuratuur (Prosecutor's Office)

21.

Teabeamet (The Information Board)

22.

Maa-amet (Estonian Land Board)

23.

Keskkonnainspektsioon (Environmental Inspectorate)

24.

Metsakaitse- ja Metsauuenduskeskus (Centre of Forest Protection and Silviculture)

25.

Muinsuskaitseamet (The Heritage Board)

26.

Patendiamet (Patent Office)

27.

Tehnilise Järelevalve Amet (The Estonian Technical Surveillance Authority)

28.

Tarbijakaitseamet (The Consumer Protection Board)

29.

Riigihangete Amet (Public Procurement Office)

30.

Taimetoodangu Inspektsioon (The Plant Production Inspectorate)

31.

Põllumajanduse Registrite ja Informatsiooni Amet (Agricultural Registers and
Information Board)

32.

Veterinaar- ja Toiduamet (The Veterinary and Food Board)

33.

Konkurentsiamet (The Estonian Competition Authority)

34.

Maksu –ja Tolliamet (Tax and Customs Board)

35.

Statistikaamet (Statistics Estonia)

36.

Kaitsepolitseiamet (The Security Police Board)

37.

Kodakondsus- ja Migratsiooniamet (Citizenship and Migration Board)

38.

Piirivalveamet (National Board of Border Guard)

39.

Politseiamet (National Police Board)

40.

Eesti Kohtuekspertiisi ja Instituut (Forensic Service Centre)

41.

Keskkriminaalpolitsei (Central Criminal Police)

42.

Päästeamet (The Rescue Board)

43.

Andmekaitse Inspektsioon (Estonian Data Protection Inspectorate)

44.

Ravimiamet (State Agency of Medicines)

45.

Sotsiaalkindlustusamet (Social Insurance Board)

46.

Tööturuamet (Labour Market Board)

47.

Tervishoiuamet (Health Care Board)

48.

Tervisekaitseinspektsioon (Health Protection Inspectorate)

49.

Tööinspektsioon (Labour Inspectorate)

50.

Lennuamet (Estonian Civil Aviation Administration)

51.

Maanteeamet (Estonian Road Administration)

52.

Veeteede Amet (Maritime Administration)

439

53.

Julgestuspolitsei (Central Law Enforcement Police)

54.

Kaitseressursside Amet (Defence Resources Agency)

55.

Kaitseväe Logistikakeskus (Logistics Centre of Defence Forces)
GREECE

1.

Υπουργείο Εσωτερικών (Ministry of Interior)

2.

Υπουργείο Εξωτερικών (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

3.

Υπουργείο Οικονομίας και Οικονομικών (Ministry of Economy and Finance)

4.

Υπουργείο Ανάπτυξης (Ministry of Development)

5.

Υπουργείο Δικαιοσύνης (Ministry of Justice)

6.

Υπουργείο Εθνικής Παιδείας και Θρησκευμάτων (Ministry of Education and
Religion)

7.

Υπουργείο Πολιτισμού (Ministry of Culture)

8.

Υπουργείο Υγείας και Κοινωνικής Αλληλεγγύης (Ministry of Health and Social
Solidarity)

9.

Υπουργείο Περιβάλλοντος, Χωροταξίας και Δημοσίων Έργων (Ministry of
Environment, Physical Planning and Public Works)

10.

Υπουργείο Απασχόλησης και Κοινωνικής Προστασίας (Ministry of Employment and
Social Protection)

11.

Υπουργείο Μεταφορών
Communications)

12.

Υπουργείο Αγροτικής Ανάπτυξης και Τροφίμων (Ministry of Rural Development
and Food)

13.

Υπουργείο Εμπορικής Ναυτιλίας, Αιγαίου και Νησιωτικής Πολιτικής (Ministry of
Mercantile Marine, Aegean and Island Policy)

14.

Υπουργείο Μακεδονίας- Θράκης (Ministry of Macedonia and Thrace)

15.

Γενική Γραμματεία Επικοινωνίας (General Secretariat of Communication)

16.

Γενική Γραμματεία Ενημέρωσης (General Secretariat of Information)

17.

Γενική Γραμματεία Νέας Γενιάς (General Secretariat for Youth)

18.

Γενική Γραμματεία Ισότητας (General Secretariat of Equality)

19.

Γενική Γραμματεία Κοινωνικών Ασφαλίσεων (General Secretariat for Social
Security)

20.

Γενική Γραμματεία Απόδημου Ελληνισμού (General Secretariat for Greeks Living
Abroad)

21.

Γενική Γραμματεία Βιομηχανίας (General Secretariat for Industry)

22.

Γενική Γραμματεία Έρευνας και Τεχνολογίας (General Secretariat for Research and

και

Επικοινωνιών

Technology)
440

(Ministry

of

Transport

and

23.

Γενική Γραμματεία Αθλητισμού (General Secretariat for Sports)

24.

Γενική Γραμματεία Δημοσίων Έργων (General Secretariat for Public Works)

25.

Γενική Γραμματεία Εθνικής Στατιστικής Υπηρεσίας Ελλάδος (National Statistical
Service)

26.

Εθνικό Συμβούλιο Κοινωνικής Φροντίδας (National Welfare Council)

27.

Οργανισμός Εργατικής Κατοικίας (Workers' Housing Organisation)

28.

Εθνικό Τυπογραφείο (National Printing Office)

29.

Γενικό Χημείο του Κράτους (General State Laboratory)

30.

Ταμείο Εθνικής Οδοποιίας (Greek Highway Fund)

31.

Εθνικό Καποδιστριακό Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών (University of Athens)

32.

Αριστοτέλειο Πανεπιστήμιο Θεσσαλονίκης (University of Thessaloniki)

33.

Δημοκρίτειο Πανεπιστήμιο Θράκης (University of Thrace)

34.

Πανεπιστήμιο Αιγαίου (University of Aegean)

35.

Πανεπιστήμιο Ιωαννίνων (University of Ioannina)

36.

Πανεπιστήμιο Πατρών (University of Patras)

37.

Πανεπιστήμιο Μακεδονίας (University of Macedonia)

38.

Πολυτεχνείο Κρήτης (Polytechnic School of Crete)

39.

Σιβιτανίδειος Δημόσια Σχολή Τεχνών και Επαγγελμάτων (Sivitanidios Technical
School)

40.

Αιγινήτειο Νοσοκομείο (Eginitio Hospital)

41.

Αρεταίειο Νοσοκομείο (Areteio Hospital)

42.

Εθνικό Κέντρο Δημόσιας Διοίκησης (National Centre of Public Administration)

43.

Οργανισμός Διαχείρισης Δημοσίου Υλικού (Α.Ε. Public Material Μanagement
Organisation)

44.

Οργανισμός Γεωργικών Ασφαλίσεων (Farmers' Insurance Organisation)

45.

Οργανισμός Σχολικών Κτιρίων (School Building Organisation)

46.

Γενικό Επιτελείο Στρατού (Army General Staff)

47.

Γενικό Επιτελείο Ναυτικού (Navy General Staff)

48.

Γενικό Επιτελείο Αεροπορίας (Airforce General Staff)

49.

Ελληνική Επιτροπή Ατομικής Ενέργειας (Greek Atomic Energy Commission)

50.

Γενική Γραμματεία Εκπαίδευσης Ενηλίκων (General Secretariat for Further
Education)

51.

Υπουργείο Εθνικής Άμυνας (Ministry of National Defence)

52.

Γενική Γραμματεία Εμπορίου (General Secretariat of Commerce)

53.

Ελληνικά Ταχυδρομεία Hellenic Post (EL. TA)

441

SPAIN
Presidencia de Gobierno
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores y de Cooperación
Ministerio de Justicia
Ministerio de Defensa
Ministerio de Economía y Hacienda
Ministerio del Interior
Ministerio de Fomento
Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia
Ministerio de Industria, Turismo y Comercio
Ministerio de Trabajo y Asuntos Sociales
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Ministerio de la Presidencia
Ministerio de Administraciones Públicas
Ministerio de Cultura
Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo
Ministerio de Medio Ambiente
Ministerio de Vivienda
FRANCE
1.

Ministères

Services du Premier ministre
Ministère chargé de la santé, de la jeunesse et des sports
Ministère chargé de l'intérieur, de l'outre-mer et des collectivités territoriales
Ministère chargé de la justice
Ministère chargé de la défense
Ministère chargé des affaires étrangères et européennes
Ministère chargé de l'éducation nationale
Ministère chargé de l'économie, des finances et de l'emploi
Secrétariat d'Etat aux transports
Secrétariat d'Etat aux entreprises et au commerce extérieur
Ministère chargé du travail, des relations sociales et de la solidarité
Ministère chargé de la culture et de la communication
Ministère chargé du budget, des comptes publics et de la fonction publique

442

Ministère chargé de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Ministère chargé de l'enseignement supérieur et de la recherche
Ministère chargé de l'écologie, du développement et de l'aménagement durables
Secrétariat d'Etat à la fonction publique
Ministère chargé du logement et de la ville
Secrétariat d'Etat à la coopération et à la francophonie
Secrétariat d'Etat à l'outre-mer
Secrétariat d'Etat à la jeunesse et aux sports et de la vie associative
Secrétariat d'Etat aux anciens combattants
Ministère chargé de l'immigration, de l'intégration, de l'identité nationale et du codéveloppement
Secrétariat d'Etat en charge de la prospective et de l'évaluation des politiques publiques
Secrétariat d'Etat aux affaires européennes
Secrétariat d'Etat aux affaires étrangères et aux droits de l'homme
Secrétariat d'Etat à la consommation et au tourisme
Secrétariat d'Etat à la politique de la ville
Secrétariat d'Etat à la solidarité
Secrétariat d'Etat en charge de l'emploi
Secrétariat d'Etat en charge du commerce, de l'artisanat, des PME, du tourisme et des services
Secrétariat d'Etat en charge du développement de la région-capitale
Secrétariat d'Etat en charge de l'aménagement du territoire
2.

Établissements publics nationaux

Académie de France à Rome
Académie de marine
Académie des sciences d'outre-mer
Académie des technologies
Agence Centrale des Organismes de Sécurité Sociale (A.C.O.S.S.)
Agences de l'eau
Agence de biomédecine
Agence pour l'enseignement du français à l'étranger
Agence française de sécurité sanitaire des aliments
Agence française de sécurité sanitaire de l'environnement et du travail
Agence Nationale de l'Accueil des Etrangers et des migrations
Agence nationale pour l'amélioration des conditions de travail (ANACT)

443

Agence nationale pour l'amélioration de l'habitat (ANAH)
Agence Nationale pour la Cohésion Sociale et l'Egalité des Chances
Agence pour la garantie du droit des mineurs
Agence nationale pour l'indemnisation des français d'outre-mer (ANIFOM)
Assemblée permanente des chambres d'agriculture (APCA)
Bibliothèque nationale de France
Bibliothèque nationale et universitaire de Strasbourg
Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations
Caisse nationale des autoroutes (CNA)
Caisse nationale militaire de sécurité sociale (CNMSS)
Caisse de garantie du logement locatif social
Casa de Velasquez
Centre d'enseignement zootechnique
Centre d'études de l'emploi
Centre hospitalier national des Quinze-Vingts
Centre international d'études supérieures en sciences agronomiques (Montpellier Sup Agro)
Centre des liaisons européennes et internationales de sécurité sociale
Centre des Monuments Nationaux
Centre national d'art et de culture Georges Pompidou
Centre national des arts plastiques
Centre national de la cinématographie
Institut national supérieur de formation et de recherche pour l'éducation des jeunes handicapés
et les enseignements adaptés
Centre National d'Etudes et d'expérimentation du machinisme agricole, du génie rural, des
eaux et des forêts (CEMAGREF)
Ecole nationale supérieure de Sécurité Sociale
Centre national du livre
Centre national de documentation pédagogique
Centre national des œuvres universitaires et scolaires (CNOUS)
Centre national professionnel de la propriété forestière
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (C.N.R.S)
Centres d'éducation populaire et de sport (CREPS)
Centres régionaux des œuvres universitaires (CROUS)
Collège de France

444

Conservatoire de l'espace littoral et des rivages lacustres
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers
Conservatoire national supérieur de musique et de danse de Paris
Conservatoire national supérieur de musique et de danse de Lyon
Conservatoire national supérieur d'art dramatique
Ecole centrale de Lille
Ecole centrale de Lyon
École centrale des arts et manufactures
École française d'archéologie d'Athènes
École française d'Extrême-Orient
École française de Rome
École des hautes études en sciences sociales
Ecole du Louvre
École nationale d'administration
École nationale de l'aviation civile (ENAC)
École nationale des Chartes
École nationale d'équitation
Ecole Nationale du Génie de l'Eau et de l'environnement de Strasbourg
Écoles nationales d'ingénieurs
Ecole nationale d'ingénieurs des industries des techniques agricoles et alimentaires de Nantes
Écoles nationales d'ingénieurs des travaux agricoles
École nationale de la magistrature
Écoles nationales de la marine marchande
École nationale de la santé publique (ENSP)
École nationale de ski et d'alpinisme
École nationale supérieure des arts décoratifs
École nationale supérieure des arts et industries textiles Roubaix
Ecole nationale supérieure des arts et techniques du théâtre
Écoles nationales supérieures d'arts et métiers
École nationale supérieure des beaux-arts
École nationale supérieure de céramique industrielle
École nationale supérieure de l'électronique et de ses applications (ENSEA)
Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Sciences de l'information et des bibliothécaires
Écoles nationales vétérinaires
445

École nationale de voile
Écoles normales supérieures
École polytechnique
École de viticulture — Avize (Marne)
Etablissement national d'enseignement agronomique de Dijon
Établissement national des invalides de la marine (ENIM)
Établissement national de bienfaisance Koenigswarter
Fondation Carnegie
Fondation Singer-Polignac
Haras nationaux
Hôpital national de Saint-Maurice
Institut français d'archéologie orientale du Caire
Institut géographique national
Institut National des Appellations d'origine
Institut national des hautes études de sécurité
Institut de veille sanitaire
Institut National d'enseignement supérieur et de recherche agronomique et agroalimentaire de
Rennes
Institut National d'Etudes Démographiques (I.N.E.D)
Institut National d'Horticulture
Institut National de la jeunesse et de l'éducation populaire
Institut national des jeunes aveugles — Paris
Institut national des jeunes sourds — Bordeaux
Institut national des jeunes sourds — Chambéry
Institut national des jeunes sourds — Metz
Institut national des jeunes sourds — Paris
Institut national de physique nucléaire et de physique des particules (I.N.P.N.P.P)
Institut national de la propriété industrielle
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (I.N.R.A)
Institut National de la Recherche Pédagogique (I.N.R.P)
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (I.N.S.E.R.M)
Institut national d'histoire de l'art (I.N.H.A.)
Institut National des Sciences de l'Univers
Institut National des Sports et de l'Education Physique

446

Instituts nationaux polytechniques
Instituts nationaux des sciences appliquées
Institut national de recherche en informatique et en automatique (INRIA)
Institut national de recherche sur les transports et leur sécurité (INRETS)
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement
Instituts régionaux d'administration
Institut des Sciences et des Industries du vivant et de l'environnement (Agro Paris Tech)
Institut supérieur de mécanique de Paris
Institut Universitaires de Formation des Maîtres
Musée de l'armée
Musée Gustave-Moreau
Musée du Louvre
Musée du Quai Branly
Musée national de la marine
Musée national J.-J.-Henner
Musée national de la Légion d'honneur
Musée de la Poste
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle
Musée Auguste-Rodin
Observatoire de Paris
Office français de protection des réfugiés et apatrides
Office National des Anciens Combattants et des Victimes de Guerre (ONAC)
Office national de la chasse et de la faune sauvage
Office National de l'eau et des milieux aquatiques
Office national d'information sur les enseignements et les professions (ONISEP)
Office universitaire et culturel français pour l'Algérie
Palais de la découverte
Parcs nationaux
Universités
3.

Institutions, autorités et juridictions indépendantes

Présidence de la République
Assemblée Nationale
Sénat
Conseil constitutionnel
447

Conseil économique et social
Conseil supérieur de la magistrature
Agence française contre le dopage
Autorité de contrôle des assurances et des mutuelles
Autorité de contrôle des nuisances sonores aéroportuaires
Autorité de régulation des communications électroniques et des postes
Autorité de sûreté nucléaire
Comité national d'évaluation des établissements publics à caractère scientifique, culturel et
professionnel
Commission d'accès aux documents administratifs
Commission consultative du secret de la défense nationale
Commission nationale des comptes de campagne et des financements politiques
Commission nationale de contrôle des interceptions de sécurité
Commission nationale de déontologie de la sécurité
Commission nationale du débat public
Commission nationale de l'informatique et des libertés
Commission des participations et des transferts
Commission de régulation de l’énergie
Commission de la sécurité des consommateurs
Commission des sondages
Commission de la transparence financière de la vie politique
Conseil de la concurrence
Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel
Défenseur des enfants
Haute autorité de lutte contre les discriminations et pour l'égalité
Haute autorité de santé
Médiateur de la République
Cour de justice de la République
Tribunal des Conflits
Conseil d'Etat
Cours administratives d'appel
Tribunaux administratifs
Cour des Comptes
Chambres régionales des Comptes

448

Cours et tribunaux de l'ordre judiciaire (Cour de Cassation, Cours d'Appel, Tribunaux
d'instance et Tribunaux de grande instance)
4.

Autre organisme public national

Union des groupements d'achats publics (UGAP)
Agence Nationale pour l'emploi (A.N.P.E)
Autorité indépendante des marchés financiers
Caisse Nationale des Allocations Familiales (CNAF)
Caisse Nationale d'Assurance Maladie des Travailleurs Salariés (CNAMS)
Caisse Nationale d'Assurance-Vieillesse des Travailleurs Salariés (CNAVTS)
CROATIA
Hrvatski sabor (Croatian Parliament)
Predsjednik Republike Hrvatske (President of the Republic of Croatia)
Ured predsjednika Republike Hrvatske (Office of the President of the Republic of Croatia)
Ured predsjednika Republike Hrvatske po prestanku obnašanja dužnosti (Office of the
President of the Republic of Croatia after the expiry of the term of office)
Vlada Republike Hrvatske (Government of the of the Republic of Croatia)
uredi Vlade Republike Hrvatske (Offices of the Government of the Republic of Croatia)
Ministarstvo gospodarstva (Ministry of Economy)
Ministarstvo regionalnoga razvoja i fondova Europske unije (Ministry of Regional
Development and EU Funds)
Ministarstvo financija (Ministry of Finance)
Ministarstvo obrane (Ministry of Defence)
Ministarstvo vanjskih i europskih poslova (Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs)
Ministarstvo unutarnjih poslova (Ministry of the Interior)
Ministarstvo pravosuđa (Ministry of Justice)
Ministarstvo uprave (Ministry of Public Administration)
Ministarstvo poduzetništva i obrta (Ministry of Entrepreneurship and Crafts)
Ministarstvo rada i mirovinskog sustava (Ministry of Labour and Pension System)
Ministarstvo pomorstva, prometa i infrastrukture (Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and
Infrastructure)
Ministarstvo poljoprivrede (Ministry of Agriculture)
Ministarstvo turizma (Ministry of Tourism)
Ministarstvo zaštite okoliša i prirode (Ministry of Environmental and Nature Protection)

449

Ministarstvo graditeljstva i prostornoga uređenja (Ministry of Construction and Physical
Planning)
Ministarstvo branitelja (Ministry of Veterans' Affairs)
Ministarstvo socijalne politike i mladih (Ministry of Social Policy and Youth)
Ministarstvo zdravlja (Ministry of Health)
Ministarstvo znanosti, obrazovanja i sporta (Ministry of Science, Education and Sports)
Ministarstvo kulture (Ministry of Culture)
državne upravne organizacije (State administrative organisations)
uredi državne uprave u županijama (County state administration offices)
Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske (Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia)
Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske (Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia)
sudovi (Courts)
Državno sudbeno vijeće (State Judiciary Council)
državna odvjetništva (State attorney's offices)
Državnoodvjetničko vijeće (State Prosecutor's Council)
pravobraniteljstva (Ombudsman's offices)
Državna komisija za kontrolu postupaka javne nabave (State Commission for the Supervision
of Public Procurement Procedures)
Hrvatska narodna banka (Croatian National Bank)
državne agencije i uredi (State agencies and offices)
Državni ured za reviziju (State Audit Office)
IRELAND
1.

President's Establishment

2.

Houses of the Oireachtas — [Parliament]

3.

Department of the Taoiseach — [Prime Minister]

4.

Central Statistics Office

5.

Department of Finance

6.

Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General

7.

Office of the Revenue Commissioners

8.

Office of Public Works

9.

State Laboratory

10.

Office of the Attorney General

11.

Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions

450

12.

Valuation Office

13.

Commission for Public Service Appointments

14.

Office of the Ombudsman

15.

Chief State Solicitor's Office

16.

Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform

17.

Courts Service

18.

Prisons Service

19.

Office of the Commissioners of Charitable Donations and Bequests

20.

Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government

21.

Department of Education and Science

22.

Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources

23.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food

24.

Department of Transport

25.

Department of Health and Children

26.

Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment

27.

Department of Arts, Sports and Tourism

28.

Department of Defence

29.

Department of Foreign Affairs

30.

Department of Social and Family Affairs

31.

Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht — [Gaelic speaking regions] Affairs

32.

Arts Council

33.

National Gallery
ITALY

I.

Purchasing bodies:

1.

Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri (Presidency of the Council of Ministers)

2.

Ministero degli Affari Esteri (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

3.

Ministero dell'Interno (Ministry of Interior)

4.

Ministero della Giustizia e Uffici giudiziari (esclusi i giudici di pace) (Ministry of
Justice and the Judicial Offices (other than the giudici di pace)

5.

Ministero della Difesa (Ministry of Defence)

6.

Ministero dell'Economia e delle Finanze (Ministry of Economy and Finance)

7.

Ministero dello Sviluppo Economico (Ministry of Economic Development)

8.

Ministero del Commercio internazionale (Ministry of International Trade)

451

9.

Ministero delle Comunicazioni (Ministry of Communications)

10.

Ministero delle Politiche Agricole e Forestali (Ministry of Agriculture and Forest
Policies)

11.

Ministero dell'Ambiente e Tutela del Territorio e del Mare (Ministry of Environment,
Land and Sea)

12.

Ministero delle Infrastrutture (Ministry of Infrastructure)

13.

Ministero dei Trasporti (Ministry of Transport)

14.

Ministero del Lavoro e delle politiche sociali e della Previdenza sociale (Ministry of
Labour, Social Policy and Social Security)

15.

Ministero della Solidarietà sociale (Ministry of Social Solidarity)

16.

Ministero della Salute (Ministry of Health)

17.

Ministero dell' Istruzione dell' università e della ricerca (Ministry of Education,
University and Research)

18.

Ministero per i Beni e le Attività culturali comprensivo delle sue articolazioni
periferiche (Ministry of Heritage and Culture, including its subordinated entities)

II.

Other National public bodies:

CONSIP (Concessionaria Servizi Informatici Pubblici)55
CYPRUS
1.

(a)

Προεδρία και Προεδρικό Μέγαρο (Presidency and Presidential Palace)

(b)

Γραφείο Συντονιστή
Harmonisation)

Εναρμόνισης

(Office

of

the

Coordinator

for

2.

Υπουργικό Συμβούλιο (Council of Ministers)

3.

Βουλή των Αντιπροσώπων (House of Representatives)

4.

Δικαστική Υπηρεσία (Judicial Service)

5.

Νομική Υπηρεσία της Δημοκρατίας (Law Office of the Republic)

6.

Ελεγκτική Υπηρεσία της Δημοκρατίας (Audit Office of the Republic)

7.

Επιτροπή Δημόσιας Υπηρεσίας (Public Service Commission)

8.

Επιτροπή Εκπαιδευτικής Υπηρεσίας (Educational Service Commission)

9.

Γραφείο Επιτρόπου Διοικήσεως (Office of the Commissioner for Administration
(Ombudsman))

10.

Επιτροπή Προστασίας Ανταγωνισμού (Commission for the Protection of
Competition)

11.

Υπηρεσία Εσωτερικού Ελέγχου (Internal Audit Service)

12.

Γραφείο Προγραμματισμού (Planning Bureau)

55

Acts as the central purchasing entity for all the Italian public administration.

452

13.

Γενικό Λογιστήριο της Δημοκρατίας (Treasury of the Republic)

14.

Γραφείο Επιτρόπου Προστασίας Δεδομένων Προσωπικού Χαρακτήρα (Office of the
Personal Character Data Protection Commissioner)

15.

Γραφείο Εφόρου Δημοσίων Ενισχύσεων (Office of the Commissioner for the Public
Aid)

16.

Αναθεωρητική Αρχή Προσφορών (Tender Review Body)

17.

Υπηρεσία Εποπτείας και Ανάπτυξης Συνεργατικών Εταιρειών (Cooperative
Societies΄ Supervision and Development Authority)

18.

Αναθεωρητική Αρχή Προσφύγων (Refugees’ Review Body)

19.

Υπουργείο Άμυνας (Ministry of Defence)

20.

(a)

Υπουργείο Γεωργίας, Φυσικών Πόρων και Περιβάλλοντος (Ministry of Agriculture,
Natural Resources and Environment)

(b)

Τμήμα Γεωργίας (Department of Agriculture)

(c)

Κτηνιατρικές Υπηρεσίες (Veterinary Services)

(d)

Τμήμα Δασών (Forest Department)

(e)

Τμήμα Αναπτύξεως Υδάτων (Water Development Department)

(f)

Τμήμα Γεωλογικής Επισκόπησης (Geological Survey Department)

(g)

Μετεωρολογική Υπηρεσία (Meteorological Service)

(h)

Τμήμα Αναδασμού (Land Consolidation Department)

(i)

Υπηρεσία Μεταλλείων (Mines Service)

(j)

Ινστιτούτο Γεωργικών Ερευνών (Agricultural Research Institute)

(k)

Τμήμα Αλιείας και Θαλάσσιων Ερευνών (Department of Fisheries and Marine
Research)

21.

22.

(a)

Υπουργείο Δικαιοσύνης και Δημοσίας Τάξεως (Ministry of Justice and Public Order)

(b)

Αστυνομία (Police)

(c)

Πυροσβεστική Υπηρεσία Κύπρου (Cyprus Fire Service)

(d)

Τμήμα Φυλακών (Prison Department)

(a)

Υπουργείο Εμπορίου, Βιομηχανίας και Τουρισμού (Ministry of Commerce, Industry
and Tourism)

23.

(b)

Τμήμα Εφόρου Εταιρειών και Επίσημου Παραλήπτη (Department of Registrar
of Companies and Official Receiver)

(a)

Υπουργείο Εργασίας και Κοινωνικών Ασφαλίσεων (Ministry of Labour and Social
Insurance)

(b)

Τμήμα Εργασίας (Department of Labour)

(c)

Τμήμα Κοινωνικών Ασφαλίσεων (Department of Social Insurance)

(d)

Τμήμα Υπηρεσιών Κοινωνικής Ευημερίας (Department of Social Welfare Services)

(e)

Κέντρο Παραγωγικότητας Κύπρου (Productivity Centre Cyprus)

453

24.

(f)

Ανώτερο Ξενοδοχειακό Ινστιτούτο Κύπρου (Higher Hotel Institute Cyprus)

(g)

Ανώτερο Τεχνολογικό Ινστιτούτο (Higher Τechnical Institute)

(h)

Τμήμα Επιθεώρησης Εργασίας (Department of Labour Inspection)

(i)

Τμήμα Εργασιακών Σχέσεων (Depertment of Labour Relations)

(a)

Υπουργείο Εσωτερικών (Ministry of the Interior)

(b)

Επαρχιακές Διοικήσεις (District Administrations)

(c)

Τμήμα Πολεοδομίας και Οικήσεως (Town Planning and Housing Department)

(d)

Τμήμα Αρχείου Πληθυσμού και Μεταναστεύσεως (Civil Registry and
Migration Department)

(e)

Τμήμα Κτηματολογίου και Χωρομετρίας (Department of Lands and Surveys)

(f)

Γραφείο Τύπου και Πληροφοριών (Press and Information Office)

(g)

Πολιτική Άμυνα (Civil Defence)

(h)

Υπηρεσία Μέριμνας και Αποκαταστάσεων Εκτοπισθέντων (Service for the
care and rehabilitation of displaced persons)

(i)

Υπηρεσία Ασύλου (Asylum Service)

25.

Υπουργείο Εξωτερικών (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

26.

(a)

Υπουργείο Οικονομικών (Ministry of Finance)

(b)

Τελωνεία (Customs and Excise)

(c)

Τμήμα Εσωτερικών Προσόδων (Department of Inland Revenue)

(d)

Στατιστική Υπηρεσία (Statistical Service)

(e)

Τμήμα Κρατικών Αγορών και Προμηθειών (Department of Government
Purchasing and Supply)

(f)

Τμήμα Δημόσιας Διοίκησης και Προσωπικού (Public Administration and
Personnel Department)

(g)

Κυβερνητικό Τυπογραφείο (Government Printing Office)

(h)

Τμήμα Υπηρεσιών Πληροφορικής (Department of Information Technology Services)

27.

Υπουργείο Παιδείας και Πολιτισμού (Ministry of Εducation and Culture)

28.

(a)

Υπουργείο Συγκοινωνιών και Έργων (Ministry of Communications and Works)

(b)

Τμήμα Δημοσίων Έργων (Department of Public Works)

(c)

Τμήμα Αρχαιοτήτων (Department of Antiquities)

(d)

Τμήμα Πολιτικής Αεροπορίας (Department of Civil Aviation)

(e)

Τμήμα Εμπορικής Ναυτιλίας (Department of Merchant Shipping)

(f)

Τμήμα Ταχυδρομικών Υπηρεσιών (Postal Services Department)

(g)

Τμήμα Οδικών Μεταφορών (Department of Road Transport)

(h)

Τμήμα Ηλεκτρομηχανολογικών Υπηρεσιών (Department of Electrical and
Mechanical Services)
454

29.

(i)

Τμήμα Ηλεκτρονικών Επικοινωνιών (Department of Electronic Telecommunications)

(a)

Υπουργείο Υγείας (Ministry of Health)

(b)

Φαρμακευτικές Υπηρεσίες (Pharmaceutical Services)

(c)

Γενικό Χημείο (General Laboratory)

(d)

Ιατρικές Υπηρεσίες και Υπηρεσίες Δημόσιας Υγείας (Medical and Public
Health Services)

(e)

Οδοντιατρικές Υπηρεσίες (Dental Services)

(f)

Υπηρεσίες Ψυχικής Υγείας (Mental Health Services)
LATVIA

A)

Ministrijas, īpašu ministru sekretariāti un to padotībā esošās iestādes
(Ministries, secretariats of ministers for special assignments, and their
subordinate institutions):

1.

Aizsardzības ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Defence and
subordinate institutions)

2.

Ārlietu ministrija un tas padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
subordinate institutions)

3.

Ekonomikas ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Economics and
subordinate institutions)

4.

Finanšu ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Finance and
subordinate institutions)

5.

Iekšlietu ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of the Interior Affairs
and subordinate institutions)

6.

Izglītības un zinātnes ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of
Education and Science and subordinate institutions)

7.

Kultūras ministrija un tas padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Culture and
subordinate institutions)

8.

Labklājības ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Welfare and
subordinate institutions)

9.

Satiksmes ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Transport and
subordinate institutions)

10.

Tieslietu ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Justice and
subordinate institutions)

11.

Veselības ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Health and
subordinate institutions)

12.

Vides aizsardzības un reģionālās attīstības ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes
(Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development and subordinate
institutions)

455

13.

Zemkopības ministrija un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministry of Agriculture and
subordinate institutions)

14.

Īpašu uzdevumu ministra sekretariāti un to padotībā esošās iestādes (Ministries for
Special Assignments and subordinate institutions)

B)

Citas valsts iestādes (Other state institutions):

1.

Augstākā tiesa (Supreme Court)

2.

Centrālā vēlēšanu komisija (Central Election Commission)

3.

Finanšu un kapitāla tirgus komisija (Financial and Capital Market Commission)

4.

Latvijas Banka (Bank of Latvia)

5.

Prokuratūra un tās pārraudzībā esošās iestādes (Prosecutor's Office and institutions
under its supervision)

6.

Saeimas un tās padotībā esošās iestādes (The Parliament and subordinate institutions)

7.

Satversmes tiesa (Constitutional Court)

8.

Valsts kanceleja un tās pārraudzībā esošās iestādes (State Chancellery and
institutions under its supervision)

9.

Valsts kontrole (State Audit Office)

10.

Valsts prezidenta kanceleja (Chancellery of the State President)

11.

Citas valsts iestādes, kuras nav ministriju padotībā (Other state institutions not subordinate
to ministries):

-

Tiesībsarga birojs (Office of the Ombudsman)

-

Nacionālā radio un televīzijas padome (National Broadcasting Council)

Other state institutions

LITHUANIA
Prezidentūros kanceliarija (Office of the President)
Seimo kanceliarija (Office of the Seimas)
Seimui atskaitingos institucijos: (Institutions Accountable to the Seimas)
Lietuvos mokslo taryba (Science Council)
Seimo kontrolierių įstaiga (The Seimas Ombudsmen's Office)
Valstybės kontrolė (National Audit Office)
Specialiųjų tyrimų tarnyba (Special Investigation Service)
Valstybės saugumo departamentas (State Security Department)
Konkurencijos taryba (Competition Council)
Lietuvos gyventojų genocido ir rezistencijos tyrimo centras (Genocide and Resistance
Research Centre)

456

Vertybinių popierių komisija (Lithuanian Securities Commission)
Ryšių reguliavimo tarnyba (Communications Regulatory Authority)
Nacionalinė sveikatos taryba (National Health Board)
Etninės kultūros globos taryba (Council for the Protection of Ethnic Culture)
Lygių galimybių kontrolieriaus tarnyba (Office of Equal Opportunities Ombudsperson)
Valstybinė kultūros paveldo komisija (National Cultural Heritage Commission)
Vaiko teisių apsaugos kontrolieriaus įstaiga (Children's Rights Ombudsman Institution)
Valstybinė kainų ir energetikos kontrolės komisija (State Price Regulation Commission of
Energy Resources)
Valstybinė lietuvių kalbos komisija (State Commission of the Lithuanian Language)
Vyriausioji rinkimų komisija (Central Electoral Committee)
Vyriausioji tarnybinės etikos komisija (Chief Commission of Official Ethics)
Žurnalistų etikos inspektoriaus tarnyba (Office of the Inspector of Journalists' Ethics)
Vyriausybės kanceliarija (Office of the Government)
Vyriausybei atskaitingos institucijos (Institutions Accountable to the Government)
Ginklų fondas (Weaponry Fund)
Informacinės visuomenės plėtros komitetas (Information Society Development Committee)
Kūno kultūros ir sporto departamentas (Department of Physical Education and Sports)
Lietuvos archyvų departamentas (Lithuanian Archives Department)
Mokestinių ginčų komisija (Commission on Tax Disputes)
Statistikos departamentas (Department of Statistics)
Tautinių mažumų ir išeivijos departamentas (Department of National Minorities and
Lithuanians Living Abroad)
Valstybinė tabako ir alkoholio kontrolės tarnyba (State Tobacco and Alcohol Control Service)
Viešųjų pirkimų tarnyba (Public Procurement Office)
Valstybinė atominės energetikos saugos inspekcija (State Nuclear Power Safety Inspectorate)
Valstybinė duomenų apsaugos inspekcija (State Data Protection Inspectorate)
Valstybinė lošimų priežiūros komisija (State Gaming Control Commission)
Valstybinė maisto ir veterinarijos tarnyba (State Food and Veterinary Service)
Vyriausioji administracinių ginčų komisija (Chief Administrative Disputes Commission)
Draudimo priežiūros komisija (Insurance Supervisory Commission)
Lietuvos valstybinis mokslo ir studijų fondas (Lithuanian State Science and Studies
Foundation)
Konstitucinis Teismas (Constitutional Court)

457

Lietuvos bankas (Bank of Lithuania)
Aplinkos ministerija (Ministry of Environment)
Įstaigos prie Aplinkos ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Environment)
Generalinė miškų urėdija (Directorate General of State Forests)
Lietuvos geologijos tarnyba (Geological Survey of Lithuania)
Lietuvos hidrometeorologijos tarnyba (Lithuanian Hydrometereological Service)
Lietuvos standartizacijos departamentas (Lithuanian Standards Board)
Nacionalinis akreditacijos biuras (Lithuanian National Accreditation Bureau)
Valstybinė metrologijos tarnyba (State Metrology Service)
Valstybinė saugomų teritorijų tarnyba (State Service for Protected Areas)
Valstybinė teritorijų planavimo ir statybos inspekcija (State Territory Planning and
construction Inspectorate)
Finansų ministerija (Ministry of Finance)
Įstaigos prie Finansų ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Finance)
Muitinės departamentas (Lithuania Customs)
Valstybės dokumentų technologinės apsaugos tarnyba (Service of Technological Security of
State Documents)
Valstybinė mokesčių inspekcija (State Tax Inspectorate)
Finansų ministerijos mokymo centras (Training Centre of the Ministry of Finance)
Krašto apsaugos ministerija (Ministry of National Defence)
Įstaigos prie Krašto apsaugos ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of National
Defence)
Antrasis operatyvinių tarnybų departamentas (Second Investigation Department)
Centralizuota finansų ir turto tarnyba (Centralised Finance and Property Service)
Karo prievolės administravimo tarnyba (Military Enrolment Administration Service)
Krašto apsaugos archyvas (National Defence Archives Service)
Krizių valdymo centras (Crisis Management Centre)
Mobilizacijos departamentas (Mobilisation Department)
Ryšių ir informacinių sistemų tarnyba (Communication and Information Systems Service)
Infrastruktūros plėtros departamentas (Infrastructure Development Department)
Valstybinis pilietinio pasipriešinimo rengimo centras (Civil Resistance Centre)
Lietuvos kariuomenė (Lithuanian Armed Forces)

458

Krašto apsaugos sistemos kariniai vienetai ir tarnybos (Military Units and Services of the
National Defence System)
Kultūros ministerija (Ministry of Culture)
Įstaigos prie Kultūros ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Culture)
Kultūros paveldo departamentas (Department for the Lithuanian Cultural Heritage)
Valstybinė kalbos inspekcija (State Language Commission)
Socialinės apsaugos ir darbo ministerija (Ministry of Social Security and Labour)
Įstaigos prie Socialinės apsaugos ir darbo ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of
Social Security and Labour)
Garantinio fondo administracija (Administration of Guarantee Fund)
Valstybės vaiko teisių apsaugos ir įvaikinimo tarnyba (State Child Rights Protection and
Adoption Service)
Lietuvos darbo birža (Lithuanian Labour Exchange)
Lietuvos darbo rinkos mokymo tarnyba (Lithuanian Labour Market Training Authority)
Trišalės tarybos sekretoriatas (Tripartite Council Secretoriat)
Socialinių paslaugų priežiūros departamentas (Social Services Monitoring Department)
Darbo inspekcija (Labour Inspectorate)
Valstybinio socialinio draudimo fondo valdyba (State Social Insturance Fund Board)
Neįgalumo ir darbingumo nustatymo tarnyba (Disability and Working Capacity Establishment
Service)
Ginčų komisija (Disputes Commission)
Techninės pagalbos neįgaliesiems centras (State Centre of Compensatory Technique for the
Disabled)
Neįgaliųjų reikalų departamentas (Department of the Affairs of the Disabled)
Susisiekimo ministerija (Ministry of Transport and Communications)
Įstaigos prie Susisiekimo ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Transport and
Communications)
Lietuvos automobilių kelių direkcija (Lithuanian Road Administration)
Valstybinė geležinkelio inspekcija (State Railway Inspectorate)
Valstybinė kelių transporto inspekcija (State Road Transport Inspectorate)
Pasienio kontrolės punktų direkcija (Border Control Points Directorate)
Sveikatos apsaugos ministerija (Ministry of Health)
Įstaigos prie Sveikatos apsaugos ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Health)

459

Valstybinė akreditavimo sveikatos priežiūros veiklai tarnyba (State Health Care Accreditation
Agency)
Valstybinė ligonių kasa (State Patient Fund)
Valstybinė medicininio audito inspekcija (State Medical Audit Inspectorate)
Valstybinė vaistų kontrolės tarnyba (State Medicines Control Agency)
Valstybinė teismo psichiatrijos ir narkologijos tarnyba (Lithuanian Forensic Psychiatry and
Narcology Service)
Valstybinė visuomenės sveikatos priežiūros tarnyba (State Public Health Service)
Farmacijos departamentas (Department of Pharmacy)
Sveikatos apsaugos ministerijos Ekstremalių sveikatai situacijų centras (Health Emergency
Centre of the Ministry of Health)
Lietuvos bioetikos komitetas (Lithuanian Bioethics Committee)
Radiacinės saugos centras (Radiation Protection Centre)
Švietimo ir mokslo ministerija (Ministry of Education and Science)
Įstaigos prie Švietimo ir mokslo ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Education and
Science)
Nacionalinis egzaminų centras (National Examination Centre)
Studijų kokybės vertinimo centras (Centre for Quality Assessment in Higher Education)
Teisingumo ministerija (Ministry of Justice)
Įstaigos prie Teisingumo ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Justice)
Kalėjimų departamentas (Department of Imprisonment Establishments)
Nacionalinė vartotojų teisių apsaugos taryba (National Consumer Rights Protection Board)
Europos teisės departamentas (European Law Department)
Ūkio ministerija (Ministry of Economy)
Įstaigos prie Ūkio ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Economy)
Įmonių bankroto valdymo departamentas (Enterprise Bankruptcy Management Department)
Valstybinė energetikos inspekcija (State Energy Inspectorate)
Valstybinė ne maisto produktų inspekcija (State Non Food Products Inspectorate)
Valstybinis turizmo departamentas (Lithuanian State Department of Tourism)
Užsienio reikalų ministerija (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
Diplomatinės atstovybės ir konsulinės įstaigos užsienyje bei atstovybės prie tarptautinių
organizacijų (Diplomatic Missions and Consular as well as Representations to International
Organisations)

460

Vidaus reikalų ministerija (Ministry of the Interior)
Įstaigos prie Vidaus reikalų ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of the Interior)
Asmens dokumentų išrašymo centras (Personalisation of Identity Documents Centre)
Finansinių nusikaltimų tyrimo tarnyba (Financial Crime Investigation Service)
Gyventojų registro tarnyba (Residents' Register Service)
Policijos departamentas (Police Department)
Priešgaisrinės apsaugos ir gelbėjimo departamentas (Fire-Prevention and Rescue Department)
Turto valdymo ir ūkio departamentas (Property Management and Economics Department)
Vadovybės apsaugos departamentas (VIP Protection Department)
Valstybės sienos apsaugos tarnyba (State Border Guard Department)
Valstybės tarnybos departamentas (Civil Service Department)
Informatikos ir ryšių departamentas (IT and Communications Department)
Migracijos departamentas (Migration Department)
Sveikatos priežiūros tarnyba (Health Care Department)
Bendrasis pagalbos centras (Emergency Response Centre)
Žemės ūkio ministerija (Ministry of Agriculture)
Įstaigos prie Žemės ūkio ministerijos (Institutions under the Ministry of Agriculture)
Nacionalinė mokėjimo agentūra (National Paying Agency)
Nacionalinė žemės tarnyba (National Land Service)
Valstybinė augalų apsaugos tarnyba (State Plant Protection Service)
Valstybinė gyvulių veislininkystės priežiūros tarnyba (State Animal Breeding Supervision
Service)
Valstybinė sėklų ir grūdų tarnyba (State Seed and Grain Service)
Žuvininkystės departamentas (Fisheries Department)
Teismai (Courts)
Lietuvos Aukščiausiasis Teismas (The Supreme Court of Lithuania)
Lietuvos apeliacinis teismas (The Court of Appeal of Lithuania)
Lietuvos vyriausiasis administracinis teismas (The Supreme Administrative Court of
Lithuania);
Apygardų teismai (County courts)
Apygardų administraciniai teismai (County administrative courts)
Apylinkių teismai (District courts)
Nacionalinė teismų administracija (National Courts Administration)
Generalinė prokuratūra (The Prosecutor's Office)
461

Kiti centriniai valstybinio administravimo subjektai (institucijos, įstaigos, tarnybos) (Other Central
Public Administration Entities (institutions, establishments, agencies)



Muitinės kriminalinė tarnyba (Customs Criminal Service)



Muitinės informacinių sistemų centras (Customs Information Systems Centre)



Muitinės laboratorija (Customs Laboratory)



Muitinės mokymo centras (Customs Training Centre)
LUXEMBOURG

1.

Ministère d'Etat

2.

Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et de l'Immigration
Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et de l'Immigration: Direction de la Défense
(Armée)

3.

Ministère de l'Agriculture, de la Viticulture et du Développement Rural
Ministère de l'Agriculture, de la Viticulture et du Développement Rural:
Administration des Services Techniques de l'Agriculture

4.

Ministère des Classes moyennes, du Tourisme et du Logement

5.

Ministère de la Culture, de l'Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche

6.

Ministère de l'Economie et du Commerce extérieur

7.

Ministère de l'Education nationale et de la Formation professionnelle
Ministère de l'Education nationale et de la Formation professionnelle: Lycée
d'Enseignement Secondaire et d'Enseignement Secondaire Technique

8.

Ministère de l'Egalité des chances

9.

Ministère de l'Environnement
Ministère de l'Environnement: Administration de l'Environnement

10.

Ministère de la Famille et de l'Intégration
Ministère de la Famille et de l'Intégration: Maisons de retraite

11.

Ministère des Finances

12.

Ministère de la Fonction publique et de la Réforme administrative
Ministère de la Fonction publique et de la Réforme administrative: Service Central
des Imprimés et des Fournitures de l'Etat – Centre des Technologies de
l'informatique de l'Etat

13.

Ministère de l'Intérieur et de l'Aménagement du territoire
Ministère de l'Intérieur et de l'Aménagement du territoire: Police Grand-Ducale
Luxembourg – Inspection générale de Police

14.

Ministère de la Justice
Ministère de la Justice: Etablissements Pénitentiaires

15.

Ministère de la Santé
Ministère de la Santé: Centre hospitalier neuropsychiatrique

16.

Ministère de la Sécurité sociale
462

17.

Ministère des Transports

18.

Ministère du Travail et de l'Emploi

19.

Ministère des Travaux publics
Ministère des Travaux publics: Bâtiments Publics – Ponts et Chaussées
HUNGARY

Nemzeti Erőforrás Minisztérium (Ministry of National Resources)
Vidékfejlesztési Minisztérium (Ministry of Rural Development)
Nemzeti Fejlesztési Minisztérium (Ministry of National Development)
Honvédelmi Minisztérium (Ministry of Defence)
Közigazgatási és Igazságügyi Minisztérium (Ministry of Public Administration and Justice)
Nemzetgazdasági Minisztérium (Ministry for National Economy)
Külügyminisztérium (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
Miniszterelnöki Hivatal (Prime Minister's Office)
Belügyminisztérium, (Ministry of Internal Affairs)
Központi Szolgáltatási Főigazgatóság (Central Services Directorate)
MALTA
1.

Uffiċċju tal-Prim Ministru (Office of the Prime Minister)

2.

Ministeru għall-Familja u Solidarjeta' Soċjali (Ministry for the Family and Social
Solidarity)

3.

Ministeru ta' l-Edukazzjoni Zghazagh u Impjieg (Ministry for Education Youth and
Employment)

4.

Ministeru tal-Finanzi (Ministry of Finance)

5.

Ministeru tar-Riżorsi u l-Infrastruttura (Ministry for Resources and Infrastructure)

6.

Ministeru tat-Turiżmu u Kultura (Ministry for Tourism and Culture)

7.

Ministeru tal-Ġustizzja u l-Intern (Ministry for Justice and Home Affairs)

8.

Ministeru għall-Affarijiet Rurali u l-Ambjent (Ministry for Rural Affairs and the
Environment)

9.

Ministeru għal Għawdex (Ministry for Gozo)

10.

Ministeru tas-Saħħa, l-Anzjani u Kura fil-Kommunita' (Ministry of Health, the
Elderly and Community Care)

11.

Ministeru ta' l-Affarijiet Barranin (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

12.

Ministeru għall-Investimenti, Industrija u Teknologija ta' Informazzjoni (Ministry for
Investment, Industry and Information Technology)

13.

Ministeru għall-Kompetittivà u Komunikazzjoni (Ministry for Competitiveness and
Communications)

463

14.

Ministeru għall-Iżvilupp Urban u Toroq (Ministry for Urban Development and
Roads)

15.

L-Uffiċċju tal-President (Office of the President)

16.

Uffiċċju ta 'l-iskrivan tal-Kamra tad-Deputati (Office of the Clerk of the House of
Representatives)
THE NETHERLANDS

MINISTERIE VAN ALGEMENE ZAKEN — (MINISTRY OF GENERAL AFFAIRS)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Bureau van de Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid — (Advisory
Council on Government Policy)

–

Rijksvoorlichtingsdienst: — (The Netherlands Government Information Service)

MINISTERIE VAN BINNENLANDSE ZAKEN EN KONINKRIJKSRELATIES — (MINISTRY OF
THE INTERIOR)

–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Centrale Archiefselectiedienst (CAS) — (Central Records Selection Service)

–

Algemene Inlichtingen- en Veiligheidsdienst (AIVD) — (General Intelligence and
Security Service)

–

Agentschap Basisadministratie Persoonsgegevens en Reisdocumenten (BPR) —
(Personnel Records and Travel Documents Agency)

–

Agentschap Korps Landelijke Politiediensten — (National Police Services Agency)

MINISTERIE VAN BUITENLANDSE ZAKEN — (MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS)

–

Directoraat-generaal Regiobeleid en Consulaire Zaken (DGRC) — (Directorate-

general for Regional Policy and Consular Affairs)
–

Directoraat-generaal Politieke Zaken (DGPZ) — (Directorate-general for Political Affairs)

–

Directoraat-generaal Internationale Samenwerking (DGIS) — (Directorate-general
for International Cooperation)

–

Directoraat-generaal Europese Samenwerking (DGES) — (Directorate-general for
European Cooperation)

–

Centrum tot Bevordering van de Import uit Ontwikkelingslanden (CBI) — (Centre
for the Promotion of Imports from Developing Countries)

–

Centrale diensten ressorterend onder S/PlvS — (Support services falling under the
Secretary-general and Deputy Secretary-general)

–

Buitenlandse Posten (ieder afzonderlijk) — (the various Foreign Missions)

MINISTERIE VAN DEFENSIE — (MINISTRY OF DEFENCE)

–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

464

–

Commando Diensten Centra (CDC) — (Support Command)

–

Defensie Telematica Organisatie (DTO) — (Defence Telematics Organisation)

–

Centrale directie van de Defensie Vastgoed Dienst — (Defence Real Estate Service,
Central Directorate)

–

De afzonderlijke regionale directies van de Defensie Vastgoed Dienst — (Defence
Real Estate Service, Regional Directorates)

–

Defensie Materieel Organisatie (DMO) — (Defence Material Organisation)

–

Landelijk Bevoorradingsbedrijf van de Defensie Materieel Organisatie — (National
Supply Agency of the Defence Material Organisation)

–

Logistiek Centrum van de Defensie Materieel Organisatie — (Logistic Centre of the
Defence Material Organisation)

–

Marinebedrijf van de Defensie Materieel Organisatie — (Maintenance Establishment
of the Defence Material Organisation)

–

Defensie Pijpleiding Organisatie (DPO) — (Defence Pipeline Organisation)

MINISTERIE VAN ECONOMISCHE ZAKEN — (MINISTRY OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)

–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Centraal Planbureau (CPB) — (Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analyses)

–

Bureau voor de Industriële Eigendom (BIE) — (Industrial Property Office)

–

SenterNovem — (SenterNovem – Agency for sustainable innovation)

–

Staatstoezicht op de Mijnen (SodM) — (State Supervision of Mines)

–

Nederlandse Mededingingsautoriteit (NMa) — (Netherlands Competition Authority)

–

Economische Voorlichtingsdienst (EVD) — (Netherlands Foreign Trade Agency)

–

Agentschap Telecom — (Radiocommunications Agency)

–

Kenniscentrum Professioneel & Innovatief Aanbesteden, Netwerk voor
Overheidsopdrachtgevers (PIANOo) — (Professional and innovative procurement,
network for contracting authorities)

–

Regiebureau Inkoop Rijksoverheid — (Coordination of Central Government
Purchasing)

–

Octrooicentrum Nederland — (Netherlands Patent Office)

–

Consumentenautoriteit — (Consumer Authority)

MINISTERIE VAN FINANCIËN — (MINISTRY OF FINANCE)

–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Belastingdienst Automatiseringscentrum — (Tax and Custom Computer and
Software Centre)

–

Belastingdienst — (Tax and Customs Administration)

465

–

De afzonderlijke Directies der Rijksbelastingen — (the various Divisions of the Tax
and Customs Administration throughout the Netherlands)

–

Fiscale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst (incl. Economische Controle dienst (ECD)
— (Fiscal Information and Investigation Service (the Economic Investigation Service
included)

–

Belastingdienst Opleidingen — (Tax and Customs Training Centre)

–

Dienst der Domeinen — (State Property Service)

MINISTERIE VAN JUSTITIE — (MINISTRY OF JUSTICE)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Dienst Justitiële Inrichtingen — (Correctional Institutions Agency)

–

Raad voor de Kinderbescherming — (Child Care and Protection Agency)

–

Centraal Justitie Incasso Bureau — (Central Fine Collection Agency)

–

Openbaar Ministerie — (Public Prosecution Service)

–

Immigratie en Naturalisatiedienst — (Immigration and Naturalisation Service)

–

Nederlands Forensisch Instituut — (Netherlands Forensic Institute)

–

Dienst Terugkeer & Vertrek — (Repatriation and Departure Agency)

MINISTERIE VAN LANDBOUW, NATUUR EN VOEDSELKWALITEIT — (MINISTRY OF
AGRICULTURE, NATURE AND FOOD QUALITY)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Dienst Regelingen (DR) — (National Service for the Implementation of Regulations
(Agency))

–

Agentschap Plantenziektenkundige Dienst (PD) — (Plant Protection Service (Agency)

–

Algemene Inspectiedienst (AID) — (General Inspection Service)

–

Dienst Landelijk Gebied (DLG) — (Government Service for Sustainable Rural
Development)

–

Voedsel en Waren Autoriteit (VWA) — (Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority)

MINISTERIE VAN ONDERWIJS, CULTUUR EN WETENSCHAPPEN — (MINISTRY OF
EDUCATION, CULTURE AND SCIENCE)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Inspectie van het Onderwijs — (Inspectorate of Education)

–

Erfgoedinspectie — (Inspectorate of Heritage)

–

Centrale Financiën Instellingen — (Central Funding of Institutions Agency)

–

Nationaal Archief — (National Archives)

–

Adviesraad voor Wetenschaps- en Technologiebeleid — (Advisory Council for Science and
Technology Policy)

–

Onderwijsraad — (Education Council)

466

–

Raad voor Cultuur — (Council for Culture)

MINISTERIE VAN SOCIALE ZAKEN EN WERKGELEGENHEID — (MINISTRY OF SOCIAL
AFFAIRS AND EMPLOYMENT)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Inspectie Werk en Inkomen — (the Work and Income Inspectorate)

–

Agentschap SZW- (SZW Agency)

MINISTERIE VAN VERKEER EN WATERSTAAT — (MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT, PUBLIC
WORKS AND WATERMANAGEMENT)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Directoraat-Generaal Transport en Luchtvaart — (Directorate-general for Transport and
Civil Aviation)

–

Directoraat-generaal Personenvervoer — Directorate-general for Passenger Transport)

–

Directoraat-generaal Water — (Directorate-general of Water Affairs)

–

Centrale diensten — (Central Services)

–

Shared services Organisatie Verkeer en Watersaat — (Shared services Organisation
Transport and Water management) (new organisation)

–

Koninklijke Nederlandse Meteorologisch Instituut KNMI — (Royal Netherlands
Meteorological Institute)

–

Rijkswaterstaat, Bestuur — (Public Works and Water Management, Board)

–

De afzonderlijke regionale Diensten van Rijkswaterstaat — (Each individual regional service
of the Directorate-general of Public Works and Water Management)

–

De afzonderlijke specialistische diensten van Rijkswaterstaat — (Each individual specialist
service of the Directorate-general of Public Works and Water Management)

–

Adviesdienst Geo-Informatie en ICT — (Advisory Council for Geo-information and ICT)

–

Adviesdienst Verkeer en Vervoer (AVV) – (Advisory Council for Traffic and Transport)

–

Bouwdienst – (Service for Construction)

–

Corporate Dienst — (Corporate Service)

–

Data ICT Dienst — (Service for Data and IT)

–

Dienst Verkeer en Scheepvaart — (Service for Traffic and Ship Transport)

–

Dienst Weg- en Waterbouwkunde (DWW) — (Service for Road and Hydraulic Engineering)

–

Rijksinstituut voor Kust en Zee (RIKZ) — (National Institute for Coastal and Marine
Management)

–

Rijksinstituut voor Integraal Zoetwaterbeheer en Afvalwaterbehandeling (RIZA) —
(National Institute for Sweet Water Management and Water Treatment)

–

Waterdienst — (Service for Water)

–

Inspectie Verkeer en Waterstaat, Hoofddirectie — (Inspectorate Transport and Water
Management, Main Directorate)

–

Port state Control

467

–

Directie Toezichtontwikkeling Communicatie en Onderzoek (TCO) — (Directorate of
Development of Supervision of Communication and Research)

–

Toezichthouder Beheer Eenheid Lucht — (Management Unit "Air")

–

Toezichthouder Beheer Eenheid Water — (Management Unit "Water")

–

Toezichthouder Beheer Eenheid Land — (Management Unit "Land")

MINISTERIE VAN VOLKSHUISVESTING, RUIMTELIJKE ORDENING EN MILIEUBEHEER —
(MINISTRY FOR HOUSING, SPATIAL PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Directoraat-generaal Wonen, Wijken en Integratie — (Directorate General for Housing,
Communities and Integration)

–

Directoraat-generaal Ruimte — (Directorate General for Spatial Policy)

–

Directoraat-general Milieubeheer — (Directorate General for Environmental Protection)

–

Rijksgebouwendienst — (Government Buildings Agency)

–

VROM Inspectie — (Inspectorate)

MINISTERIE VAN VOLKSGEZONDHEID, WELZIJN EN SPORT — (MINISTRY OF HEALTH,
WELFARE AND SPORTS)
–

Bestuursdepartement — (Central policy and staff departments)

–

Inspectie Gezondheidsbescherming, Waren en Veterinaire Zaken — (Inspectorate for Health
Protection and Veterinary Public Health)

–

Inspectie Gezondheidszorg — (Health Care Inspectorate)

–

Inspectie Jeugdhulpverlening en Jeugdbescherming — (Youth Services and Youth
Protection Inspectorate)

–

Rijksinstituut voor de Volksgezondheid en Milieu (RIVM) — (National Institute of Public
Health and Environment)

–

Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau — (Social and Cultural Planning Office)

–

Agentschap t.b.v. het College ter Beoordeling van Geneesmiddelen — (Medicines
Evaluation Board Agency)

TWEEDE KAMER DER STATEN-GENERAAL — (SECOND CHAMBER OF THE STATES
GENERAL)
EERSTE KAMER DER STATEN-GENERAAL — (FIRST CHAMBER OF THE STATES
GENERAL)
RAAD VAN STATE — (COUNCIL OF STATE)
ALGEMENE REKENKAMER — (NETHERLANDS COURT OF AUDIT)
NATIONALE OMBUDSMAN — (NATIONAL OMBUDSMAN)

468

KANSELARIJ DER NEDERLANDSE ORDEN — (CHANCELLERY OF THE NETHERLANDS
ORDER)
KABINET DER KONINGIN — (QUEEN'S CABINET)
RAAD VOOR DE RECHTSPRAAK EN DE RECHTBANKEN — (JUDICIAL MANAGEMENT
AND ADVISORY BOARD AND COURTS OF LAW)

AUSTRIA
A/

Present coverage of entities

1.

Bundeskanzleramt (Federal Chancellery)

2.

Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale Angelegenheiten (Federal
Ministry for european and international Affairs)

3.

Bundesministerium für Finanzen (Federal Ministry of Finance)

4.

Bundesministerium für Gesundheit (Federal Ministry of Health)

5.

Bundesministerium für Inneres (Federal Ministry of Interior)

6.

Bundesministerium für Justiz (Federal Ministry of Justice)

7.

Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung und Sport (Federal Ministry of Defence
and Sport)

8.

Bundesministerium für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft
(Federal Ministry for Agriculture and Forestry, the Environment and Water
Management)

9.

Bundesministerium für Arbeit, Soziales und Konsumentenschutz (Federal Ministry
for Employment, Social Affairs and Consumer Protection)

10.

Bundesministerium für Unterricht, Kunst und Kultur (Federal Ministry for
Education, Art and Culture)

11.

Bundesministerium für Verkehr, Innovation und Technologie (Federal Ministry for
Transport, Innovation and Technology)

12.

Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft, Familie und Jugend (Federal Ministry for
Economic Affairs, Family and Youth)

13.

Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft und Forschung (Federal Ministry for Science
and Research)

14.

Bundesamt für Eich- und Vermessungswesen (Federal Office for Calibration and
Measurement)

15.

Österreichische Forschungs- und Prüfzentrum Arsenal Gesellschaft m.b.H (Austrian
Research and Test Centre Arsenal Ltd)

16.

Bundesanstalt für Verkehr (Federal Institute for Traffic)

17.

Bundesbeschaffung G.m.b.H (Federal Procurement Ltd)

18.

Bundesrechenzentrum G.m.b.H (Federal Data Processing Centre Ltd)

469

B/

All other central public authorities including their regional and local sub-divisions
provided that they do not have an industrial or commercial character.

POLAND
1.

Kancelaria Prezydenta RP (Chancellery of the President)

2.

Kancelaria Sejmu RP (Chancellery of the Sejm)

3.

Kancelaria Senatu RP (Chancellery of the Senate)

4.

Kancelaria Prezesa Rady Ministrów (Chancellery of the Prime Minister)

5.

Sąd Najwyższy (Supreme Court)

6.

Naczelny Sąd Administracyjny (Supreme Administrative Court)

7.

Sądy powszechne - rejonowe, okręgowe i apelacyjne (Common Court of Law District Court, Regional Court, Appellate Court)

8.

Trybunat Konstytucyjny (Constitutional Court)

9.

Najwyższa Izba Kontroli (Supreme Chamber of Control)

10.

Biuro Rzecznika Praw Obywatelskich (Office of the Human Rights Defender)

11.

Biuro Rzecznika Praw Dziecka (Office of the Children's Rigths Ombudsman)

12.

Biuro Ochrony Rządu (Government Protection Bureau)

13.

Biuro Bezpieczeństwa Narodowego (The National Security Office)

14.

Centralne Biuro Antykorupcyjne (Central Anticorruption Bureau)

15.

Ministerstwo Pracy i Polityki Społecznej (Ministry of Labour and Social Policy)

16.

Ministerstwo Finansów (Ministry of Finance)

17.

Ministerstwo Gospodarki (Ministry of Economy)

18.

Ministerstwo Rozwoju Regionalnego (Ministry of Regional Development)

19.

Ministerstwo Kultury i Dziedzictwa Narodowego (Ministry of Culture and National
Heritage)

20.

Ministerstwo Edukacji Narodowej (Ministry of National Education)

21.

Ministerstwo Obrony Narodowej (Ministry of National Defence)

22.

Ministerstwo Rolnictwa i Rozwoju Wsi (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development)

23.

Ministerstwo Skarbu Państwa (Ministry of the State Treasury)

24.

Ministerstwo Sprawiedliwości (Ministry of Justice)

25.

Ministerstwo Transportu, Budownictwa i Gospodarki Morskiej (Ministry of
Transport, Construction and Maritime Economy)

26.

Ministerstwo Nauki i Szkolnictwa Wyższego (Ministry of Science and Higher
Education)

27.

Ministerstwo Środowiska (Ministry of Environment)

470

28.

Ministerstwo Spraw Wewnętrznych (Ministry of Internal Affairs)

29.

Ministrestwo Administracji i Cyfryzacji (Ministry of Administration and
Digitisation)

30.

Ministerstwo Spraw Zagranicznych (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

31.

Ministerstwo Zdrowia (Ministry of Health)

32.

Ministerstwo Sportu i Turystyki (Ministry of Sport and Tourism)

33.

Urząd Patentowy Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej (Patent Office of the Republic of
Poland)

34.

Urząd Regulacji Energetyki (The Energy Regulatory Authority of Poland)

35.

Urząd do Spraw Kombatantów i Osób Represjonowanych (Office for Military
Veterans and Victims of Repression)

36.

Urząd Transportu Kolejowego (Office for Railroad Transport)

37.

Urząd Dozoru Technicznego (Office of Technical Inspection)

38.

Urząd Rejestracji Produktów Leczniczych, Wyrobów Medycznych i Produktów
Biobójczych (The Office for Registration of Medicinal Products, Medical Devices
and Biocidal Products)

39.

Urząd do Spraw Cudzoziemców (Office for Foreigners)

40.

Urząd Zamówień Publicznych (Public Procurement Office)

41.

Urząd Ochrony Konkurencji i Konsumentów (Office for Competition and Consumer
Protection)

42.

Urząd Lotnictwa Cywilnego (Civil Aviation Office)

43.

Urząd Komunikacji Elektronicznej (Office of Electronic Communication)

44.

Wyższy Urząd Górniczy (State Mining Authority)

45.

Główny Urząd Miar (Main Office of Measures)

46.

Główny Urząd Geodezji i Kartografii (The Main Office of Geodesy and
Cartography)

47.

Główny Urząd Nadzoru Budowlanego (The General Office of Building Control)

48.

Główny Urząd Statystyczny (Main Statistical Office)

49.

Krajowa Rada Radiofonii i Telewizji (National Broadcasting Council)

50.

Generalny Inspektor Ochrony Danych Osobowych (Inspector General for the
Protection of Personal Data)

51.

Państwowa Komisja Wyborcza (State Election Commission)

52.

Państwowa Inspekcja Pracy (National Labour Inspectorate)

53.

Rządowe Centrum Legislacji (Government Legislation Centre)

54.

Narodowy Fundusz Zdrowia (National Health Fund)

55.

Polska Akademia Nauk (Polish Academy of Science)

471

56.

Polskie Centrum Akredytacji (Polish Accreditation Centre)

57.

Polskie Centrum Badań i Certyfikacji (Polish Centre for Testing and Certification)

58.

Polska Organizacja Turystyczna (Polish National Tourist Office)

59.

Polski Komitet Normalizacyjny (Polish Committee for Standardisation)

60.

Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych (Social Insurance Institution)

61.

Komisja Nadzoru Finansowego (Polish Financial Supervision Authority)

62.

Naczelna Dyrekcja Archiwów Państwowych (Head Office of State Archives)

63.

Kasa Rolniczego Ubezpieczenia Społecznego (Agricultural Social Insurance Fund)

64.

Generalna Dyrekcja Dróg Krajowych i Autostrad (The General Directorate of
National Roads and Motorways)

65.

Główny Inspektorat Ochrony Roślin i Nasiennictwa (The Main Inspectorate for the
Inspection of Plant and Seeds Protection)

66.

Komenda Główna Państwowej Straży Pożarnej (The National Headquarters of the
State Fire-Service)

67.

Komenda Główna Policji (Polish National Police)

68.

Komenda Główna Straży Granicxnej (The Chief Boarder Guards Command)

69.

Główny Inspektorat Jakości Handlowej Artykułów Rolno-Spożywczych (The Main
Inspectorate of Commercial Quality of Agri-Food Products)

70.

Główny Inspektorat Ochrony Środowiska (The Main Inspectorate for Environment
Protection)

71.

Główny Inspektorat Transportu Drogowego (Main Inspectorate of Road Transport)

72.

Główny Inspektorat Farmaceutyczny (Main Pharmaceutical Inspectorate)

73.

Główny Inspektorat Sanitarny (Main Sanitary Inspectorate)

74.

Główny Inspektorat Weterynarii (The Main Veterinary Inspectorate)

75.

Agencja Bezpieczeństwa Wewnętrznego (Internal Security Agency)

76.

Agencja Wywiadu (Foreign Intelligence Agency)

77.

Agencja Mienia Wojskowego (Agency for Military Property)

78.

Wojskowa Agencja Mieszkaniowa (Military Real Estate Agency)

79.

Agencja Restrukturyzacji i Modernizacji Rolnictwa (Agency for Restructuring and
Modernisation of Agriculture)

80.

Agencja Rynku Rolnego (Agriculture Market Agency)

81.

Agencja Nieruchomości Rolnych (Agricultural Property Agency)

82.

Państwowa Agencja Atomistyki (National Atomic Energy Agency)

83.

Polska Agencja Żeglugi Powietrznej (Polish Air Navigation Services Agency)

84.

Polska Agencja Rozwiązywania Problemów Alkoholowych (State Agency for
Prevention of Alcohol Related Problems)
472

85.

Agencja Rezerw Materiałowych (The Material Reserves Agency)

86.

Narodowy Bank Polski (National Bank of Poland)

87.

Narodowy Fundusz Ochrony Środowiska i Gospodarki Wodnej (The National Fund
for Environmental Protection and Water Management)

88.

Państwowy Fundusz Rehabilitacji Osób Niepełnosprawnych (National Disabled
Persons Rehabilitation Fund)

89.

Instytut Pamięci Narodowej - Komisja Ścigania Zbrodni Przeciwko Narodowi
Polskiemu (National Remembrance Institute - Commission for Prosecution of
Crimes Against the Polish Nation)

90.

Rada Ochrony Pamięci Walk i Męczeństwa (The Committee of Protection of
Memory of Combat and Martyrdom)

91.

Służba Celna Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej (Customs Service of the Republic of Poland)

92.

Państwowe Gospodarstwo Leśne "Lasy Państwowe" (State Forest Enterprise Lasy
Państwowe")

93.

Polska Agencja Rozwoju Przedsiębiorczości (Polish Agency for Enterprise
Development)

94.

Samodzielne Publiczne Zakłady Opieki Zdrowotnej, jeśli ich organem
założycielskim jest minister, centralny organ administracji rządowej lub wojewoda
(Public Autonomous Health Care Management Units established by minister, central
government unit or voivoda).
PORTUGAL

1.

Presidência do Conselho de Ministros (Presidency of the Council of Ministers)

2.

Ministério das Finanças (Ministry of Finance)

3.

Ministério da Defesa Nacional (Ministry of Defence)

4.

Ministério dos Negócios Estrangeiros e das Comunidades Portuguesas (Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Portuguese Communities)

5.

Ministério da Administração Interna (Ministry of Internal Affairs)

6.

Ministério da Justiça (Ministry of Justice)

7.

Ministério da Economia (Ministry of Economy)

8.

Ministério da Agricultura, Desenvolvimento Rural e Pescas (Ministry of Agriculture,
Rural Development and Fishing)

9.

Ministério da Educação (Ministry of Education)

10.

Ministério da Ciência e do Ensino Superior (Ministry of Science and University
Education)

11.

Ministério da Cultura (Ministry of Culture)

12.

Ministério da Saúde (Ministry of Health)

473

13.

Ministério do Trabalho e da Solidariedade Social (Ministry of Labour and Social
Solidarity)

14.

Ministério das Obras Públicas, Transportes e Habitação (Ministry of Public Works,
Transports and Housing)

15.

Ministério das Cidades, Ordenamento do Território e Ambiente (Ministry of Cities,
Land Management and Environment)

16.

Ministério para a Qualificação e o Emprego (Ministry for Qualification and
Employment)

17.

Presidença da Republica (Presidency of the Republic)

18.

Tribunal Constitucional (Constitutional Court)

19.

Tribunal de Contas (Court of Auditors)

20.

Provedoria de Justiça (Ombudsman)
ROMANIA

Administraţia Prezidenţială (Presidential Administration)
Senatul României (Romanian Senate)
Camera Deputaţilor (Chamber of Deputies)
Inalta Curte de Casaţie şi Justiţie (Supreme Court)
Curtea Constituţională (Constitutional Court)
Consiliul Legislativ (Legislative Council)
Curtea de Conturi (Court of Accounts)
Consiliul Superior al Magistraturii (Superior Council of Magistracy)
Parchetul de pe lângă Inalta Curte de Casaţie şi Justiţie (Prosecutor's Office Attached to the
Supreme Court)
Secretariatul General al Guvernului (General Secretariat of the Government)
Cancelaria primului ministru (Chancellery of the Prime Minister)
Ministerul Afacerilor Externe (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
Ministerul Economiei şi Finanţelor (Ministry of Economy and Finance)
Ministerul Justiţiei (Ministry of Justice)
Ministerul Apărării (Ministry of Defense)
Ministerul Internelor şi Reformei Administrative (Ministry of Interior and Administration
Reform)
Ministerul Muncii, Familiei şi Egalităţii de Sanse (Ministry of Labor and Equal
Opportunities)
Ministerul pentru Intreprinderi Mici şi Mijlocii, Comerţ, Turism şi Profesii Liberale (Ministry
for Small and Medium Sized Enterprises, Trade, Tourism and Liberal Professions)

474

Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale (Ministry of Agricultural and Rural
Development)
Ministerul Transporturilor (Ministry of Transport)
Ministerul Dezvoltării, Lucrărilor Publice şi Locuinţei (Ministry of Development, Public
Works and Housing)
Ministerul Educaţiei Cercetării şi Tineretului (Ministry of Education, Research and Youth)
Ministerul Sănătăţii Publice (Ministry of Public Health)
Ministerul Culturii şi Cultelor (Ministry of Culture and Religious Affairs)
Ministerul Comunicaţiilor şi Tehnologiei Informaţiei (Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology)
Ministerul Mediului şi Dezvoltării Durabile (Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Development)
Serviciul Român de Informaţii (Romanian Intelligence Service)
Serviciul Român de Informaţii Externe (Romanian Foreign Intelligence Service)
Serviciul de Protecţie şi Pază (Protection and Guard Service)
Serviciul de Telecomunicaţii Speciale (Special Telecommunication Service)
Consiliul Naţional al Audiovizualului (The National Audiovisual Council)
Consiliul Concurenţei (CC) (Competition Council)
Direcţia Naţională Anticorupţie (National Anti-corruption Department)
Inspectoratul General de Poliţie (General Inspectorate of Police)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Reglementarea şi Monitorizarea Achiziţiilor Publice (National
Authority for Regulation and Monitoring Public Procurement)
Consiliul Naţional de Soluţionare a Contestaţiilor (National Council for Solving the Contests)
Autoritatea Naţională de Reglementare pentru Serviciile Comunitare de Utilităţi Publice
(ANRSC) (National Authority for Regulating Community Services Public Utilities)
Autoritatea Naţională Sanitară Veterinară şi pentru Siguranţa Alimentelor (Sanitary
Veterinary and Food Safety National Authority)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Protecţia Consumatorilor (National Authority for Consumer
Protection)
Autoritatea Navală Română (Romanian Naval Authority)
Autoritatea Feroviară Română (Romanian Railway Authority)
Autoritatea Rutieră Română (Romanian Road Authority)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Protecţia Drepturilor Copilului-şi Adopţie (National Authority
for the Protection of Child Rights and Adoption)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Persoanele cu Handicap (National Authority for Disabled
Persons)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Tineret (National Authority for Youth)
475

Autoritatea Naţională pentru Cercetare Stiinţifica (National Authority for Scientific Research)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Comunicaţii (National Authority for Communications)
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Serviciile Societăţii Informaţionale (National Authority for
Informational Society Services)
Autoritatea Electorală Permanente (Permanent Electoral Authority)
Agenţia pentru Strategii Guvernamentale (Agency for Governmental Strategies)
Agenţia Naţională a Medicamentului (National Medicines Agency)
Agenţia Naţională pentru Sport (National Agency for Sports)
Agenţia Naţională pentru Ocuparea Forţei de Muncă (National Agency for Employment)
Agenţia Naţională de Reglementare în Domeniul Energiei (National Authority for Electrical
Energy Regulation)
Agenţia Română pentru Conservarea Energiei (Romanian Agency for Power Conservation)
Agenţia Naţională pentru Resurse Minerale (National Agency for Mineral Resources)
Agenţia Română pentru Investiţii Străine (Romanian Agency for Foreign Investment)
Agenţia Naţională a Funcţionarilor Publici (National Agency of Public Civil Servants)
Agenţia Naţională de Administrare Fiscală (National Agency of Fiscal Administration)
Agenţia de Compensare pentru Achiziţii de Tehnică Specială (Agency For Offsetting Special
Technique Procurements)
Agenţia Naţională Anti-doping (National Anti-Doping Agency)
Agenţia Nucleară (Nuclear Agency)
Agenţia Naţională pentru Protecţia Familiei (National Agency for Family Protection)
Agenţia Naţională pentru Egalitatea de Sanse între Bărbaţi şi Femei (National Authority for
Equality of Chances between Men and Women)
Agenţia Naţională pentru Protecţia Mediului (National Agency for Environmental Protection)
Agenţia naţională Antidrog (National Anti-drugs Agency)
SLOVENIA
1.

Predsednik Republike Slovenije (President of the Republic of Slovenia)

2.

Državni zbor (The National Assembly)

3.

Državni svet (The National Council)

4.

Varuh človekovih pravic (The Ombudsman)

5.

Ustavno sodišče (The Constitutional Court)

6.

Računsko sodišče (The Court of Audits)

7.

Državna revizijska komisja (The National Review Commission)

8.

Slovenska akademija znanosti in umetnosti (The Slovenian Academy of Science and
Art)
476

9.

Vladne službe (The Government Services)

10.

Ministrstvo za finance (Ministry of Finance)

11.

Ministrstvo za notranje zadeve (Ministry of Internal Affairs)

12.

Ministrstvo za zunanje zadeve (Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

13.

Ministrstvo za obrambo (Ministry of Defence)

14.

Ministrstvo za pravosodje (Ministry of Justice)

15.

Ministrstvo za gospodarstvo (Ministry of the Economy)

16.

Ministrstvo za kmetijstvo, gozdarstvo in prehrano (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry
and Food)

17.

Ministrstvo za promet (Ministry of Transport)

18.

Ministrstvo za okolje, prostor in energijo (Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning
and Energy)

19.

Ministrstvo za delo, družino in socialne zadeve (Ministry of Labour, Family and
Social Affairs)

20.

Ministrstvo za zdravje (Ministry of Health)

21.

Ministrstvo za visoko šolstvo, znanost in tehnogijo (Ministry of Higher Education,
Science and Technology)

22.

Ministrstvo za kulturo (Ministry of Culture)

23.

Ministerstvo za javno upravo (Ministry of Public Administration)

24.

Vrhovno sodišče Republike Slovenije (The Supreme Court of the Republic of
Slovenia)

25.

Višja sodišča (Higher Courts)

26.

Okrožna sodišča (District Courts)

27.

Okrajna sodišča (County Courts)

28.

Vrhovno tožilstvo Republike Slovenije (The Supreme Prosecutor of the Republic of
Slovenia)

29.

Okrožna državna tožilstva (Districts' State Prosecutors)

30.

Družbeni pravobranilec Republike Slovenije (Social Attorney of the Republic of
Slovenia)

31.

Državno pravobranilstvo Republike Slovenije (National Attorney of the Republic of
Slovenia)

32.

Upravno sodišče Republike Slovenije (Administrative Court of the Republic of
Slovenia)

33.

Senat za prekrške Republike Slovenije (Senat of Minor Offenses of the Republic of
Slovenia)

34.

Višje delovno in socialno sodišče v Ljubljani (Higher Labour and Social Court)

35.

Delovna in sodišča (Labour Courts)
477

36.

Upravne note (Local Administrative Units)
SLOVAKIA

Ministries and other central government authorities referred to as in Act No. 575/2001 Coll.
on the structure of activities of the Government and central state administration authorities in
wording of later amendments:
Ministerstvo hospodárstva Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Economy of the Slovak
Republic)
Ministerstvo financií Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo dopravy, výstavby a regionálneho rozvoja Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of
Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo pôdohospodárstva a rozvoja vidieka Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo vnútra Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Interior of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo obrany Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Defence of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo spravodlivosti Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Justice of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo zahraničných vecí Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo práce, sociálnych vecí a rodiny Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Labour, Social
Affairs and Family of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo životného prostredia Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Environment of the
Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo školstva, vedy, výskumu a športu Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Education,
Science, Research and Sport of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo kultúry Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Culture of the Slovak Republic)
Ministerstvo zdravotníctva Slovenskej republiky (Ministry of Health Service of the Slovak
Republic)
Úrad vlády Slovenskej republiky (The Government Office of the Slovak Republic)
Protimonopolný úrad Slovenskej republiky (Antimonopoly Office of the Slovak Republic)
Štatistický úrad Slovenskej republiky (Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic)
Úrad geodézie, kartografie a katastra Slovenskej republiky (The Office of Land Surveyor,
Cartography and Cadastre of the Slovak Republic)
Úrad jadrového dozoru Slovenskej republiky (Nuclear Regulatory Authority of the Slovak
Republic)
Úrad pre normalizáciu, metrológiu a skúšobníctvo Slovenskej republiky (Slovak Office of
Standards, Metrology and Testing)
Úrad pre verejné obstarávanie (The Office for Public Procurement)
478

Úrad priemyselného vlastníctva Slovenskej republiky (Industrial Property Office of the
Slovak Republic)
Správa štátnych hmotných rezerv Slovenskej republiky (The Administration of State Material
Reserves of the Slovak Republic)
Národný bezpečnostný úrad (National Security Authority)
Kancelária Prezidenta Slovenskej republiky (The Office of the President of the Slovak
Republic)
Národná rada Slovenskej republiky (National Council of the Slovak Republic)
Ústavný súd Slovenskej republiky (Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic)
Najvyšší súd Slovenskej republiky (Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic)
Generálna prokuratúra Slovenskej republiky (Public Prosecution of the Slovak Republic)
Najvyšší kontrolný úrad Slovenskej republiky (Supreme Audit Office of the Slovak Republic)
Telekomunikačný úrad Slovenskej republiky (Telecommunications Office of the Slovak
Republic)
Poštový úrad (Postal Regulatory Office)
Úrad na ochranu osobných údajov (Office for Personal Data Protection)
Kancelária verejného ochrancu práv (Ombudsman's Office)
Úrad pre finančný trh (Office for the Finance Market)
FINLAND
OIKEUSKANSLERINVIRASTO – JUSTITIEKANSLERSÄMBETET (OFFICE OF THE
CHANCELLOR OF JUSTICE)
LIIKENNE- JA VIESTINTÄMINISTERIÖ – KOMMUNIKATIONSMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS)

Viestintävirasto – Kommunikationsverket (Finnish Communications Regulatory Authority)
Ajoneuvohallintokeskus AKE – Fordonsförvaltningscentralen AKE (Finnish Vehicle
Administration)
Ilmailuhallinto – Luftfartsförvaltningen (Finnish Civil Aviation Authority)
Ilmatieteen laitos – Meteorologiska institutet (Finnish Meterological Institute)
Merenkulkulaitos – Sjöfartsverket (The Finnish Maritime Administration)
Merentutkimuslaitos – Havsforskningsinstitutet (Finnish Institute of Marine Research)
Ratahallintokeskus RHK – Banförvaltningscentralen RHK (Rail Administration)
Rautatievirasto – Järnvägsverket (Finnish Railway Agency)
Tiehallinto – Vägförvaltningen (Road Administration)
MAA- JA METSÄTALOUSMINISTERIÖ – JORD- OCH SKOGSBRUKSMINISTERIET
(MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY)

479

Elintarviketurvallisuusvirasto – Livsmedelssäkerhetsverket (Finnish Food Safety Authority)
Maanmittauslaitos – Lantmäteriverket (National Land Survey of Finland)
Maaseutuvirasto – Landsbygdsverket (The Countryside Agency)
OIKEUSMINISTERIÖ – JUSTITIEMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF JUSTICE)

Tietosuojavaltuutetun toimisto – Dataombudsmannens byrå (Office of the Data Protection
Ombudsman)
Tuomioistuimet – domstolar (Courts of Law)
Korkein oikeus – Högsta domstolen (Supreme Court)
Korkein hallinto-oikeus – Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen (Supreme Administrative Court)
Hovioikeudet – hovrätter (Courts of Appeal)
Käräjäoikeudet – tingsrätter (District Courts)
Hallinto-oikeudet – förvaltningsdomstolar (Administrative Courts)
Markkinaoikeus – Marknadsdomstolen (Market Court)
Työtuomioistuin – Arbetsdomstolen (Labour Court)
Vakuutusoikeus – Försäkringsdomstolen (Insurance Court)
Kuluttajariitalautakunta – Konsumenttvistenämnden (Consumer Complaint Board)
Vankeinhoitolaitos – Fångvårdsväsendet (Prison Service)
HEUNI – Yhdistyneiden Kansakuntien yhteydessä toimiva Euroopan kriminaalipolitiikan
instituutti – HEUNI – Europeiska institutet för kriminalpolitik, verksamt i anslutning till
Förenta Nationerna (the European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control)
Konkurssiasiamiehen toimisto – Konkursombudsmannens byrå (Office of Bankrupcy
Ombudsman)
Oikeushallinnon palvelukeskus – Justitieförvaltningens servicecentral (Legal Management
Service)
Oikeushallinnon tietotekniikkakeskus – Justitieförvaltningens datateknikcentral (Legal
Administrative Computing Center)
Oikeuspoliittinen tutkimuslaitos (Optula) – Rättspolitiska forskningsinstitutet (Legal Policy
Institute)
Oikeusrekisterikeskus – Rättsregistercentralen (Legal Register Centre)
Onnettomuustutkintakeskus – Centralen för undersökning av olyckor (Accident Investigation
Board)
Rikosseuraamusvirasto – Brottspåföljdsverket (Criminal sanctions Agency)
Rikosseuraamusalan koulutuskeskus – Brottspåföljdsområdets utbildningscentral (Training
Institute for Prison and Probation Services)
Rikoksentorjuntaneuvosto Rådet för brottsförebyggande (National Council for Crime
Prevention)

480

Saamelaiskäräjät – Sametinget (The Saami Parliament)
Valtakunnansyyttäjänvirasto – Riksåklagarämbetet (the Office of the Prosecutor General)
OPETUSMINISTERIÖ – UNDERVISNINGSMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF EDUCATION)
Opetushallitus – Utbildningsstyrelsen (National Board of Education)

Valtion elokuvatarkastamo – Statens filmgranskningsbyrå (Finnish Board of Film Classification)
PUOLUSTUSMINISTERIÖ – FÖRSVARSMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF DEFENCE)

Puolustusvoimat – Försvarsmakten (Finnish Defence Forces)
SISÄASIAINMINISTERIÖ – INRIKESMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF THE INTERIOR)
Keskusrikospoliisi – Centralkriminalpolisen (Central Criminal Police)
Liikkuva poliisi – Rörliga polisen (National Traffic Police)
Rajavartiolaitos – Gränsbevakningsväsendet (Frontier Guard)
Suojelupoliisi – Skyddspolisen (Police protection)
Poliisiammattikorkeakoulu – Polisyrkeshögskolan (Police College)
Poliisin tekniikkakeskus – Polisens teknikcentral (Police Technical Centre)
Pelastusopisto – Räddningsverket (Emergency Services)
Hätäkeskuslaitos – Nödcentralsverket (Emergency Response Centre)
Maahanmuuttovirasto – Migrationsverket (Immigration Authority)
Sisäasiainhallinnon palvelukeskus – Inrikesförvaltningens servicecentral (Interior Management
Service)
Helsingin kihlakunnan poliisilaitos – Polisinrättningen i Helsingfors (Helsinki Police Department)
Valtion turvapaikanhakijoiden vastaanottokeskukset – Statliga förläggningar för asylsökande
(Reception centres for Asylum Seekers)
SOSIAALI- JA TERVEYSMINISTERIÖ – SOCIAL- OCH HÄLSOVÅRDSMINISTERIET
(MINISTRY OF SOCIAL AFFAIRS AND HEALTH)
Työttömyysturvalautakunta – Besvärsnämnden för utkomstskyddsärenden (Unemployment Appeal
Board)
Sosiaaliturvan muutoksenhakulautakunta – Besvärsnämnden för socialtrygghet (Appeal Tribunal)
Lääkelaitos – Läkemedelsverket (National Agency for Medicines)
Terveydenhuollon oikeusturvakeskus – Rättsskyddscentralen för hälsovården (National Authority for
Medicolegal Affairs)
Säteilyturvakeskus – Strålsäkerhetscentralen (Finnish Centre for Radiation and Nuclear Safety)
Kansanterveyslaitos – Folkhälsoinstitutet (National Public Health Institute)
Lääkehoidon kehittämiskeskus ROHTO – Utvecklingscentralen för läkemedelsbe-handling (Centre for
Pharmacotherapy Development ROHTO)

481

Sosiaali- ja terveydenhuollon tuotevalvontakeskus – Social- och hälsovårdens produkttill-synscentral
(the National Product Control Agency's SSTV)
Sosiaali- ja terveysalan tutkimus- ja kehittämiskeskus Stakes – Forsknings- och utvecklingscentralen
för social- och hälsovården Stakes (Health and Social Care Research and Development Center
STAKES)
TYÖ- JA ELINKEINOMINISTERIÖ – ARBETS- OCH NÄRINGSMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF
EMPLOYMENT AND THE ECONOMY)
Kuluttajavirasto – Konsumentverket (Finnish Consumer Agency)
Kilpailuvirasto – Konkurrensverket (Finnish Competition Authority)
Patentti- ja rekisterihallitus – Patent- och registerstyrelsen (National Board of Patents and
Registration)
Valtakunnansovittelijain toimisto – Riksförlikningsmännens byrå (National Conciliators' Office)
Työneuvosto – Arbetsrådet (Labour Council)
Energiamarkkinavirasto − Energimarknadsverket (Energy Market Authority)
Geologian tutkimuskeskus – Geologiska forskningscentralen (Geological Survey of Finland)
Huoltovarmuuskeskus – Försörjningsberedskapscentralen (The National Emergency Supply Agency)
Kuluttajatutkimuskeskus – Konsumentforskningscentralen (National Consumer Research Center)
Matkailun edistämiskeskus (MEK) – Centralen för turistfrämjande (Finnish Tourist Board)
Mittatekniikan keskus (MIKES) – Mätteknikcentralen (Centre for Metrology and Accrediattion)
Tekes - teknologian ja innovaatioiden kehittämiskeskus −Tekes - utvecklingscentralen för teknologi
och innovationer (Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation)
Turvatekniikan keskus (TUKES) – Säkerhetsteknikcentralen (Safety Technology Authority)
Valtion teknillinen tutkimuskeskus (VTT) – Statens tekniska forskningscentral (VTT Technical
Research Centre of Finland)
Syrjintälautakunta – Nationella diskrimineringsnämnden (Discrimination Tribunal)
Vähemmistövaltuutetun toimisto – Minoritetsombudsmannens byrå (Office of the Ombudsman for
Minorities)
ULKOASIAINMINISTERIÖ – UTRIKESMINISTERIET (MINISTRY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS)
VALTIONEUVOSTON KANSLIA – STATSRÅDETS KANSLI (PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE)
VALTIOVARAINMINISTERIÖ – FINANSMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF FINANCE)
Valtiokonttori – Statskontoret (State Treasury)
Verohallinto – Skatteförvaltningen (Tax Administration)
Tullilaitos – Tullverket (Customs)
Tilastokeskus – Statistikcentralen (Statistics Finland)
Valtiontaloudellinen tutkimuskeskus – Statens ekonomiska forskiningscentral (Government Institute
for Economic Research)

482

Väestörekisterikeskus – Befolkningsregistercentralen (Population Register Centre)
YMPÄRISTÖMINISTERIÖ – MILJÖMINISTERIET (MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT)
Suomen ympäristökeskus - Finlands miljöcentral (Finnish Environment Institute)
Asumisen rahoitus- ja kehityskeskus – Finansierings- och utvecklingscentralen för boendet (The
Housing Finance and Development Centre of Finland)
VALTIONTALOUDEN TARKASTUSVIRASTO – STATENS REVISIONSVERK (NATIONAL
AUDIT OFFICE)

SWEDEN
Royal Academy of Fine Arts

Akademien för de fria konsterna

National Board for Consumer Complaints

Allmänna reklamationsnämnden

Labour Court

Arbetsdomstolen

Swedish Employment Services

Arbetsförmedlingen

National Agency for Government Employers

Arbetsgivarverk, statens

National Institute for Working Life

Arbetslivsinstitutet

Swedish Work Environment Authority

Arbetsmiljöverket

Swedish Inheritance Fund Commission

Arvsfondsdelegationen

Museum of Architecture

Arkitekturmuseet

National Archive of Recorded Sound and
Moving Images

Ljud och bildarkiv, statens

The Office of the Childrens' Ombudsman

Barnombudsmannen

Swedish Council on Technology Assessment
in Health Care

Beredning för utvärdering av medicinsk metodik,
statens

Royal Library

Kungliga Biblioteket

National Board of Film Censors

Biografbyrå, statens

Dictionary of Swedish Biography

Biografiskt lexikon, svenskt

Swedish Accounting Standards Board

Bokföringsnämnden

Swedish Companies Registration Office

Bolagsverket

National Housing Credit Guarantee Board

Bostadskreditnämnd, statens (BKN)

National Housing Board

Boverket

National Council for Crime Prevention

Brottsförebyggande rådet

Criminal Victim Compensation and Support
Authority

Brottsoffermyndigheten

483

National Board of Student Aid

Centrala studiestödsnämnden

Data Inspection Board

Datainspektionen

Ministries (Government Departments)

Departementen

National Courts Administration

Domstolsverket

National Electrical Safety Board

Elsäkerhetsverket

Swedish Energy Markets Inspectorate

Energimarknadsinspektionen

Export Credits Guarantee Board

Exportkreditnämnden

Swedish Fiscal Policy Council

Finanspolitiska rådet

Financial Supervisory Authority

Finansinspektionen

National Board of Fisheries

Fiskeriverket

National Institute of Public Health

Folkhälsoinstitut, statens

Swedish Research Council for Environment

Forskningsrådet för miljö, areella näringar och
samhällsbyggande, Formas

National Fortifications Administration

Fortifikationsverket

National Mediation Office

Medlingsinstitutet

Defence Material Administration

Försvarets materielverk

National Defence Radio Institute

Försvarets radioanstalt

Swedish Museums of Military History

Försvarshistoriska museer, statens

National Defence College

Försvarshögskolan

The Swedish Armed Forces

Försvarsmakten

Social Insurance Office

Försäkringskassan

Geological Survey of Sweden

Geologiska undersökning, Sveriges

Geotechnical Institute

Geotekniska institut, statens

The National Rural Development Agency

Glesbygdsverket

Graphic Institute and the Graduate School of
Communications

Grafiska institutet och institutet för högre
kommunikations- och reklamutbildning

The Swedish Broadcasting Commission

Granskningsnämnden för Radio och TV

Swedish Government Seamen's Service

Handelsflottans kultur- och fritidsråd

Ombudsman for the Disabled

Handikappombudsmannen

Board of Accident Investigation

Haverikommission, statens

Courts of Appeal (6)

Hovrätterna (6)

Regional Rent and Tenancies Tribunals (12)

Hyres- och arendenämnder (12)

484

Committee on Medical Responsibility

Hälso- och sjukvårdens ansvarsnämnd

National Agency for Higher Education

Högskoleverket

Supreme Court

Högsta domstolen

National Institute for Psycho-Social Factors
and Health

Institut för psykosocial miljömedicin, statens

National Institute for Regional Studies

Institut för tillväxtpolitiska studier

Swedish Institute of Space Physics

Institutet för rymdfysik

International Programme Office for Education
and Training

Internationella programkontoret för
utbildningsområdet

Swedish Migration Board

Migrationsverket

Swedish Board of Agriculture

Jordbruksverk, statens

Office of the Chancellor of Justice

Justitiekanslern

Office of the Equal Opportunities
Ombudsman

Jämställdhetsombudsmannen

National Judicial Board of Public Lands and
Funds

Kammarkollegiet

Administrative Courts of Appeal (4)

Kammarrätterna (4)

National Chemicals Inspectorate

Kemikalieinspektionen

National Board of Trade

Kommerskollegium

Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems

Verket för innovationssystem (VINNOVA)

National Institute of Economic Research

Konjunkturinstitutet

Swedish Competition Authority

Konkurrensverket

College of Arts, Crafts and Design

Konstfack

College of Fine Arts

Konsthögskolan

National Museum of Fine Arts

Nationalmuseum

Arts Grants Committee

Konstnärsnämnden

National Art Council

Konstråd, statens

National Board for Consumer Policies

Konsumentverket

National Laboratory of Forensic Science

Kriminaltekniska laboratorium, statens

Prison and Probation Service

Kriminalvården

National Paroles Board

Kriminalvårdsnämnden

Swedish Enforcement Authority

Kronofogdemyndigheten

National Council for Cultural Affairs

Kulturråd, statens

485

Swedish Coast Guard

Kustbevakningen

National Land Survey

Lantmäteriverket

Royal Armoury

Livrustkammaren/Skoklosters slott/ Hallwylska
museet

National Food Administration

Livsmedelsverk, statens

The National Gaming Board

Lotteriinspektionen

Medical Products Agency

Läkemedelsverket

County Administrative Courts (24)

Länsrätterna (24)

County Administrative Boards (24)

Länsstyrelserna (24)

National Government Employee and Pensions
Board

Pensionsverk, statens

Market Court

Marknadsdomstolen

Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological
Institute

Meteorologiska och hydrologiska institut, Sveriges

Modern Museum

Moderna museet

Swedish National Collections of Music

Musiksamlingar, statens

Swedish Agency for Disability Policy
Coordination

Myndigheten för handikappolitisk samordning

Swedish Agency for Networks and
Cooperation in Higher Education

Myndigheten för nätverk och samarbete inom högre
utbildning

Commission for state grants to religious
communities

Nämnden för statligt stöd till trossamfun

Museum of Natural History

Naturhistoriska riksmuseet

National Environmental Protection Agency

Naturvårdsverket

Scandinavian Institute of African Studies

Nordiska Afrikainstitutet

Nordic School of Public Health

Nordiska högskolan för folkhälsovetenskap

Recorders Committee

Notarienämnden

Swedish National Board for Intra Country
Adoptions

Myndigheten för internationella adoptionsfrågor

Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional
Growth

Verket för näringslivsutveckling (NUTEK)

Office of the Ethnic Discrimination
Ombudsman

Ombudsmannen mot etnisk diskriminering

Court of Patent Appeals

Patentbesvärsrätten

Patents and Registration Office

Patent- och registreringsverket

486

Swedish Population Address Register Board

Personadressregisternämnd statens, SPAR-nämnden

Swedish Polar Research Secretariat

Polarforskningssekretariatet

Press Subsidies Council

Presstödsnämnden

The Council of the European Social Fund in
Sweden

Rådet för Europeiska socialfonden i Sverige

The Swedish Radio and TV Authority

Radio- och TV-verket

Government Offices

Regeringskansliet

Supreme Administrative Court

Regeringsrätten

Central Board of National Antiquities

Riksantikvarieämbetet

National Archives

Riksarkivet

Bank of Sweden

Riksbanken

Parliamentary Administrative Office

Riksdagsförvaltningen

The Parliamentary Ombudsmen

Riksdagens ombudsmän, JO

The Parliamentary Auditors

Riksdagens revisorer

National Debt Office

Riksgäldskontoret

National Police Board

Rikspolisstyrelsen

National Audit Bureau

Riksrevisionen

Travelling Exhibitions Service

Riksutställningar, Stiftelsen

National Space Board

Rymdstyrelsen

Swedish Council for Working Life and Social
Research

Forskningsrådet för arbetsliv och socialvetenskap

National Rescue Services Board

Räddningsverk, statens

Regional Legal-aid Authority

Rättshjälpsmyndigheten

National Board of Forensic Medicine

Rättsmedicinalverket

Sami (Lapp) School Board

Sameskolstyrelsen och sameskolor

Sami (Lapp) Schools
National Maritime Administration

Sjöfartsverket

National Maritime Museums

Maritima museer, statens

Swedish Commission on Security and
Integrity Protection

Säkerhets- och intregritetsskyddsnämnden

Swedish Tax Agency

Skatteverket

National Board of Forestry

Skogsstyrelsen

National Agency for Education

Skolverk, statens

487

Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease
Control

Smittskyddsinstitutet

National Board of Health and Welfare

Socialstyrelsen

National Inspectorate of Explosives and
Flammables

Sprängämnesinspektionen

Statistics Sweden

Statistiska centralbyrån

Agency for Administrative Development

Statskontoret

Swedish Radiation Safety Authority

Strålsäkerhetsmyndigheten

Swedish International Development
Cooperation Authority

Styrelsen för internationellt utvecklings- samarbete,
SIDA

National Board of Psychological Defence and
Conformity Assessment

Styrelsen för psykologiskt försvar

Swedish Board for Accreditation

Styrelsen för ackreditering och teknisk kontroll

Swedish Institute

Svenska Institutet, stiftelsen

Library of Talking Books and Braille
Publications

Talboks- och punktskriftsbiblioteket

District and City Courts (97)

Tingsrätterna (97)

Judges Nomination Proposal Committee

Tjänsteförslagsnämnden för domstolsväsendet

Armed Forces' Enrolment Board

Totalförsvarets pliktverk

Swedish Defence Research Agency

Totalförsvarets forskningsinstitut

Swedish Board of Customs

Tullverket

Swedish Tourist Authority

Turistdelegationen

The National Board of Youth Affairs

Ungdomsstyrelsen

Universities and University Colleges

Universitet och högskolor

Aliens Appeals Board

Utlänningsnämnden

National Seed Testing and Certification
Institute

Utsädeskontroll, statens

Swedish National Road Administration

Vägverket

National Water Supply and Sewage Tribunal

Vatten- och avloppsnämnd, statens

National Agency for Higher Education

Verket för högskoleservice (VHS)

Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional
Development

Verket för näringslivsutveckling (NUTEK)

Swedish Research Council

Vetenskapsrådet'

National Veterinary Institute

Veterinärmedicinska anstalt, statens

488

Swedish National Road and Transport
Research Institute

Väg- och transportforskningsinstitut, statens

National Plant Variety Board

Växtsortnämnd, statens

Swedish Prosecution Authority

Åklagarmyndigheten

Swedish Emergency Management Agency

Krisberedskapsmyndigheten

Board of Appeals of the Manna Mission

Överklagandenämnden för nämndemannauppdrag

UNITED KINGDOM
Cabinet Office

Office of the Parliamentary Counsel
Central Office of Information
Charity Commission
Crown Estate Commissioners (Vote Expenditure Only)
Crown Prosecution Service
Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform

Competition Commission
Gas and Electricity Consumers' Council
Office of Manpower Economics
Department for Children, Schools and Families
Department of Communities and Local Government
Rent Assessment Panels
Department for Culture, Media and Sport

British Library
British Museum
Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment
The Gambling Commission
Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England (English Heritage)
Imperial War Museum
Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Science Museum
489

Tate Gallery
Victoria and Albert Museum
Wallace Collection
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

Agricultural Dwelling House Advisory Committees
Agricultural Land Tribunals
Agricultural Wages Board and Committees
Cattle Breeding Centre
Countryside Agency
Plant Variety Rights Office
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution
Department of Health
Dental Practice Board

National Health Service Strategic Health Authorities
NHS Trusts
Prescription Pricing Authority
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills
Higher Education Funding Council for England

National Weights and Measures Laboratory
Patent Office
Department for International Development
Department of the Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor
Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
Department for Transport
Maritime and Coastguard Agency
Department for Work and Pensions
Disability Living Allowance Advisory Board

Independent Tribunal Service
Medical Boards and Examining Medical Officers (War Pensions)
Occupational Pensions Regulatory Authority
Regional Medical Service
Social Security Advisory Committee

490

Export Credits Guarantee Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Wilton Park Conference Centre
Government Actuary's Department
Government Communications Headquarters
Home Office
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary
House of Commons
House of Lords
Ministry of Defence
Defence Equipment & Support

Meteorological Office
Ministry of Justice
Boundary Commission for England

Combined Tax Tribunal
Council on Tribunals
Court of Appeal - Criminal
Employment Appeals Tribunal
Employment Tribunals
HMCS Regions, Crown, County and Combined Courts (England and Wales)
Immigration Appellate Authorities
Immigration Adjudicators
Immigration Appeals Tribunal
Lands Tribunal
Law Commission
Legal Aid Fund (England and Wales)
Office of the Social Security Commissioners
Parole Board and Local Review Committees
Pensions Appeal Tribunals
Public Trust Office
Supreme Court Group (England and Wales)
Transport Tribunal
The National Archives

491

National Audit Office
National Savings and Investments
National School of Government
Northern Ireland Assembly Commission
Northern Ireland Court Service

Coroners Courts
County Courts
Court of Appeal and High Court of Justice in Northern Ireland
Crown Court
Enforcement of Judgements Office
Legal Aid Fund
Magistrates' Courts
Pensions Appeals Tribunals
Northern Ireland, Department for Employment and Learning
Northern Ireland, Department for Regional Development
Northern Ireland, Department for Social Development
Northern Ireland, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development
Northern Ireland, Department of Culture, Arts and Leisure
Northern Ireland, Department of Education
Northern Ireland, Department of Enterprise, Trade and Investment
Northern Ireland, Department of the Environment
Northern Ireland, Department of Finance and Personnel
Northern Ireland, Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety
Northern Ireland, Office of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister
Northern Ireland Office
Crown Solicitor's Office

Department of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland
Forensic Science Laboratory of Northern Ireland
Office of the Chief Electoral Officer for Northern Ireland
Police Service of Northern Ireland
Probation Board for Northern Ireland
State Pathologist Service
Office of Fair Trading

492

Office for National Statistics
National Health Service Central Register
Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration and Health Service Commissioners
Paymaster General's Office
Postal Business of the Post Office
Privy Council Office
Public Record Office
HM Revenue and Customs
The Revenue and Customs Prosecutions Office
Royal Hospital, Chelsea
Royal Mint
Rural Payments Agency
Scotland, Auditor-General
Scotland, Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service
Scotland, General Register Office
Scotland, Queen's and Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer
Scotland, Registers of Scotland
The Scotland Office
The Scottish Ministers

Architecture and Design Scotland
Crofters Commission
Deer Commission for Scotland
Lands Tribunal for Scotland
National Galleries of Scotland
National Library of Scotland
National Museums of Scotland
Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh
Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland
Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council
Scottish Law Commission
Community Health Partnerships
Special Health Boards
Health Boards

493

The Office of the Accountant of Court
High Court of Justiciary
Court of Session
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary
Parole Board for Scotland
Pensions Appeal Tribunals
Scottish Land Court
Sheriff Courts
Scottish Police Services Authority
Office of the Social Security Commissioners
The Private Rented Housing Panel and Private Rented Housing Committees
Keeper of the Records of Scotland
The Scottish Parliamentary Body Corporate
HM Treasury
Office of Government Commerce

United Kingdom Debt Management Office
The Wales Office (Office of the Secretary of State for Wales)
The Welsh Ministers
Higher Education Funding Council for Wales

Local Government Boundary Commission for Wales
The Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales
Valuation Tribunals (Wales)
Welsh National Health Service Trusts and Local Health Boards
Welsh Rent Assessment Panels
Notes to the European Union’s Annex 1
1.

The procurement by procuring entities covered under this Annex of good or service
components of procurements which are not themselves covered by this Chapter shall
not be considered as covered procurement.

2.

“Contracting authorities of European Union Member States” includes any
subordinated entity of any contracting authority of an European Union Member State
provided it does not have separate legal personality.

3.

As far as procurement by entities in the field of defence and security is concerned,
only non-sensitive and non-warlike materials contained in the list attached to Annex
19-4 are covered.

494

ANNEX 19-2
Sub-central government entities which procure in accordance with the provisions of the
Chapter
Section A: All regional or local contracting authorities
1.

All contracting authorities of the administrative units as defined by Regulation

1059/2003 – NUTS Regulation.
2.

For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘regional contracting authorities’ shall be
understood as contracting authorities of the administrative units falling under NUTS
1 and 2, as referred to by Regulation 1059/2003 – NUTS Regulation.

3.

For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘local contracting authorities’ shall be understood
as contracting authorities of the administrative units falling under NUTS 3 and smaller
administrative units, as referred to by Regulation 1059/2003 – NUTS Regulation.

Goods
Specified in Annex 19-4
Thresholds

SDR 200,000

Services
Specified in Annex 19-5
Thresholds

SDR 200,000

Construction services and works concessions
Specified in Annex 19-6
Thresholds

SDR 5,000,0000

Section B: All contracting authorities which are bodies governed by public law as defined by
European Union procurement directive

Goods
Specified in Annex 19-4
Thresholds - for hospitals, schools, universities,
and entities providing social services (housing,
social insurance, day care), that are bodies
governed by public law:

SDR 200,000

for other entities:

SDR 355,000

Services
Specified in Annex 19-5
Thresholds
for hospitals, schools, universities,
and entities providing social services (housing,
social insurance, day care), that are bodies
SDR 200,000
governed by public law:
for other entities:

SDR: 355,000

495

Construction services and works concessions
Specified in Annex 19-6
Thresholds

SDR 5,000,000

A “body governed by public law” means any body:
(a)

established for the specific purpose of meeting needs in the general interest, not
having an industrial or commercial character;

(b)

having legal personality; and

(c)

financed, for the most part, by the State, or regional or local authorities, or other
bodies governed by public law, or subject to management supervision by those
bodies, or having an administrative, managerial or supervisory board; more than half
of whose members are appointed by the State, regional or local authorities or by
other bodies governed by public law.

Notes to the European Union’s Annex 19-2

1.

The procurement by procuring entities covered under this Annex of good or service
components of procurement which are not themselves covered by this Chapter shall
not be considered as covered procurement.

2.

The European Union stands ready to cover easily identifiable categories of bodies
governed by public law in Annex 19-2 (active in areas such as social services or
libraries) under a lower threshold (SDR 200,000) if Canada demonstrates that the
same threshold applies to the same types of entities in Canada.

496

ANNEX 19-3
Utilities which procure in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
Goods
Specified in Annex 19-4
Thresholds

SDR 400,000

Services
Specified in Annex 19-5
Thresholds

SDR 400,000

Construction services and works concessions
Specified in Annex 19-6

Thresholds

SDR 5,000,000

All contracting entities whose procurement is covered by the European Union utilities
directive which are contracting authorities (for example, those covered under Annexes 19-1
and 19-2) or public undertakings56 and which have as one of their activities any of those
referred to below or any combination thereof:
(a)

the provision or operation of fixed networks intended to provide a service to the
public in connection with the production, transport or distribution of drinking water
or the supply of drinking water to such networks;57

(b)

the provision or operation of fixed networks intended to provide a service to the
public in connection with the production, transport or distribution of electricity, gas,
and heat, or the supply of electricity, gas and heat to such networks;

(c)

the provision or operation of networks58 providing a service to the public in the field
of transport by urban railway, automated systems, tramway, trolley bus, bus or
cable59;

(d)

the provision or operation of networks providing a service to the public in the field of
transport by railways.

Notes to the European Union’s Annex 19-3
56

57

58

59

According to the European Union utilities directive, a public undertaking is any undertaking over which
the contracting authorities may exercise directly or indirectly a dominant influence by virtue of their
ownership of it, their financial participation therein, or the rules which govern it.
A dominant influence on the part of the contracting authorities shall be presumed when these
authorities, directly or indirectly, in relation to an undertaking:
(a) hold the majority of the undertaking's subscribed capital;
(b) control the majority of the votes attaching to shares issued by the undertaking; or
(c) can appoint more than half of the undertaking's administrative, management or supervisory body.
For greater certainty, it is noted that if and where such networks include the disposal and treatment of
sewage, that part of the operation shall also be covered.
As regards transport services, a network shall be considered to exist where the service is provided under
operating conditions laid down by a competent authority of an European Union Member State, such as
conditions on the routes to be served, the capacity to be made available or the frequency of the service.
For the procurement of mass transit vehicles, Canadian bidders must be treated no less favourably than
European Union bidders or other third country bidders. A mass transit vehicle refers to a street car, bus,
trolley bus, subway car, light rail car or passenger locomotive for subway or light rail used for public
transportation.

497

1.

Contracts awarded for the pursuit of an activity listed above when exposed to
competitive forces in the market concerned are not covered by this Agreement.

2.

This Chapter shall not apply to contracts awarded by procuring entities covered
under this Annex:
(a)

for the purchase of water and for the supply of energy or of fuels for the

production of energy;
(b)

for purposes other than the pursuit of their activities as listed in this Annex or
for the pursuit of such activities in a non-European Economic Area country;

(c)

for purposes of re-sale or hire to third parties, provided that the procuring entity
enjoys no special or exclusive right to sell or hire the subject of such contracts and
other entities are free to sell or hire it under the same conditions as the procuring
entity.

3.

4.

5.

The supply of drinking water or electricity to networks which provide a service to the public
by a procuring entity other than a contracting authority shall not be considered as an activity
within the meaning of subparagraphs (a) or (b) of this Annex where:
(a)

the production of drinking water or electricity by the entity concerned takes place
because its consumption is necessary for carrying out an activity other than that
referred to in subparagraphs (a) to (d) of this Annex; and

(b)

supply to the public network depends only on the entity's own consumption and has
not exceeded 30 per cent of the entity's total production of drinking water or energy,
having regard to the average for the preceding three years, including the current year.

The supply of gas or heat to networks which provide aservice to the public by a contracting
entity other than acontracting authority shall not be considered a relevant activity within the
meaning of subparagraph (b) of this Annex where:
(a)

the production of gas or heat by the entity concerned is the unavoidable consequence
of carrying out an activity other than those referred to in subparagraphs (a) to (d ) of
this Annex; and

(b)

supply to the public network is aimed only at the economic exploitation of such
production and amounts to not more than 20 per cent of the entity's turnover having
regard to the average for the preceding three years, including the current year.

(a)

Provided that the conditions in subparagraph (b) are met, this Chapter shall not
apply to contracts awarded:
(i)

by a procuring entity to an affiliated undertaking60; or

(ii)

by a joint venture, formed exclusively by a number of procuring entities
for the purpose of carrying out activities within the meaning of
subparagraphs (a) to (d) of this Annex, to an undertaking which is affiliated
with one of these procuring entities.

60

“affiliated undertaking” means any undertaking the annual accounts of which are consolidated with
those of the procuring entity in accordance with the requirements of Council Directive 83/349/EEC on
consolidated accounts, or in case of entities not subject to that Directive, any undertaking over which
the procuring entity may exercise, directly or indirectly, a dominant influence, or which may exercise a
dominant influence over the procuring entity, or which, in common with the procuring entity, is subject
to the dominant influence of another undertaking by virtue of ownership, financial participation, or the
rules which govern it.

498

(b)

6.

Subparagraph (a) shall apply to services or supplies contracts provided that at
least 80 per cent of the average turnover of the affiliated undertaking with
respect to services or supplies for the preceding three years derives respectively
from the provision of such services or supplies to undertakings with which it is
affiliated.61

This Chapter shall not apply to contracts awarded:
(a)

by a joint venture, formed exclusively by a number of procuring entities for the
purposes of carrying out activities within the meaning of subparagraphs (a) to (d) of
this Annex, to one of these procuring entities; or

(b)

by a procuring entity to such a joint venture of which it forms part, provided that the
joint venture has been set up to carry out the activity concerned over a period of at
least three years and the instrument setting up the joint venture stipulates that the
procuring entities, which form it, will be part thereof for at least the same period.

7.

This Chapter shall not apply to procurements by procuring entities covered by this Annex for
the purpose of activities relating to the exploitation of a geographical area for the purpose of
exploring for, or extracting of, oil, gas, coal or other solid fuels.

61

When, because of the date on which an affiliated undertaking was created or commenced activities, the
turnover is not available for the preceding three years, it will be sufficient for that undertaking to show
that the turnover referred to in this paragraph is credible, in particular by means of business projections.

499

ANNEX 19-4
Goods
1.

This Chapter will apply to the procurement of all goods procured by the entities listed in
Annexes 19-1 through 19-3, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter.

2.

This Chapter covers only the supplies and equipment that are described in the Chapters of
the Combined Nomenclature (CN) specified below and that are purchased by Ministries of
Defence in Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Greece, Spain,
France, Ireland, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, the
Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland, Sweden and
the United Kingdom that are covered by the Agreement:
Chapter 25:

Salt, sulphur, earths and stone, plastering materials, lime and
cement

Chapter 26:

Metallic ores, slag and ash

Chapter 27:

Mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation,
bituminous substances, mineral waxes
except:
ex 27.10: special engine fuels

Chapter 28:

Inorganic chemicals, organic and inorganic compounds of
precious metals, of rare-earth metals, of radio-active elements
and isotopes
except:
ex 28.09: explosives
ex 28.13: explosives
ex 28.14: tear gas
ex 28.28: explosives
ex 28.32: explosives
ex 28.39: explosives
ex 28.50: toxic products
ex 28.51: toxic products
ex 28.54: explosives

Chapter 29:

Organic chemicals
except:
ex 29.03: explosives
ex 29.04: explosives
ex 29.07: explosives
ex 29.08: explosives
ex 29.11: explosives
ex 29.12: explosives
ex 29.13: toxic products
ex 29.14: toxic products
ex 29.15: toxic products
ex 29.21: toxic products

500

ex 29.22: toxic products
ex 29.23: toxic products
ex 29.26: explosives
ex 29.27: toxic products
ex 29.29: explosives
Chapter 30:

Pharmaceutical products

Chapter 31:

Fertilizers

Chapter 32:

Tanning and dyeing extracts, tannings and their derivatives,
dyes, colours, paints and varnishes, putty, fillers and stoppings,
inks

Chapter 33:

Essential oils and resinoids, perfumery, cosmetic or toilet
preparations

Chapter 34:

Soap, organic surface-active agents, washing preparations,
lubricating preparations, artificial waxes, prepared waxes,
polishing and scouring preparations, candles and similar articles,
modelling pastes and 'dental waxes'

Chapter 35:

Albuminoidal substances, glues, enzymes

Chapter 37:
Chapter 38:

Photographic and cinematographic goods
Miscellaneous chemical products
except:
ex 38.19: toxic products

Chapter 39:
Chapter 40:

Artificial resins and plastic materials, cellulose esters and ethers,
articles thereof
Rubber, synthetic rubber, factice, and articles thereof
except:
ex 40.11: bullet-proof tyres

Chapter 41:

Raw hides and skins (other than fur skins) and leather

Chapter 42:

Articles of leather, saddlery and harness, travel goods, handbags
and similar containers, articles of animal gut (other than silkworm gut)

Chapter 43:

Furskins and artificial fur, manufactures thereof

Chapter 44:

Wood and articles of wood, wood charcoal

Chapter 45:

Cork and articles of cork

Chapter 46:

Manufactures of straw of esparto and of other plaiting
materials, basket ware and wickerwork

501

Chapter 47:

Paper-making material

Chapter 48:

Paper and paperboard, articles of paper pulp, of paper or of
paperboard

Chapter 49:

Printed books, newspapers, pictures and other products of the
printing industry, manuscripts, typescripts and plans

Chapter 65:

Headgear and parts thereof

Chapter 66:

Umbrellas, sunshades, walking-sticks, whips, riding-crops and
parts thereof

Chapter 67:

Prepared feathers and down and articles made of feathers or of
down, artificial flowers, articles of human hair

Chapter 68:

Articles of stone, of plaster, of cement, of asbestos, of mica and
of similar materials

Chapter 69:

Ceramic products

Chapter 70:

Glass and glassware

Chapter 71:

Pearls, precious and semi-precious stones, precious metals,
rolled precious metals, and articles thereof; imitation jewellery

Chapter 73:

Iron and steel and articles thereof

Chapter 74:

Copper and articles thereof

Chapter 75:

Nickel and articles thereof

Chapter 76:

Aluminium and articles thereof

Chapter 77:

Magnesium and beryllium and articles thereof

Chapter 78:

Lead and articles thereof

Chapter 79:

Zinc and articles thereof

Chapter 80:

Tin and articles thereof

Chapter 81:

Other base metals employed in metallurgy and articles thereof

Chapter 82:

Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons and forks, of base metal,
parts thereof
except:
ex 82.05: tools
ex 82.07: tools, parts

502

Chapter 83:

Miscellaneous articles of base metal

Chapter 84:

Boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances, parts thereof
except:
ex 84.06: engines
ex 84.08: other engines
ex 84.45: machinery
ex 84.53: automatic data-processing machines
ex 84.55: parts of machines under heading No 84.53
ex 84.59: nuclear reactors

Chapter 85:

Electrical machinery and equipment, parts thereof
except:
ex 85.13: telecommunication equipment
ex 85.15: transmission apparatus

Chapter 86:

Railway and tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts
thereof; railway and tramway tracks fixtures and fittings, traffic
signalling equipment of all kinds (not electrically powered)
except:
ex 86.02: armoured locomotives, electric
ex 86.03: other armoured locomotives
ex 86.05: armoured wagons
ex 86.06: repair wagons
ex 86.07: wagons

Chapter 87:

Vehicles, other than railway or tramway rolling-stock, and parts
thereof
except:
ex 87.08: tanks and other armoured vehicles
ex 87.01: tractors
ex 87.02: military vehicles
ex 87.03: breakdown lorries
ex 87.09: motorcycles
ex 87.14: trailers

Chapter 89:

Ships, boats and floating structures
except:
ex 89.01 A: warships

Chapter 90:

Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking,
precision, medical and surgical instruments and apparatus, parts
thereof
except:
ex 90.05: binoculars
ex 90.13: miscellaneous instruments, lasers
ex 90.14: telemeters

503

ex 90.28: electrical and electronic measuring instruments
ex 90.11: microscopes
ex 90.17: medical instruments
ex 90.18: mechano-therapy appliances
ex 90.19: orthopaedic appliances
ex 90.20: X-ray apparatus
Chapter 91:

Manufacture of watches and clocks

Chapter 92:

Musical instruments, sound recorders or reproducers, television
image and sound recorders or reproducers, parts and
accessories of such articles

Chapter 94:

Furniture and parts thereof, bedding, mattresses, mattress
supports, cushions and similar stuffed furnishings
except:
ex 94.01 A: aircraft seats

Chapter 95:

Articles and manufactures of carving or moulding material

Chapter 96:

Brooms, brushes, powder-puffs and sieves

Chapter 98:

Miscellaneous manufactured articles

504

ANNEX 19-5
Services
Of the Universal List of Services, as contained in document MTN.GNS/W/120, the following
services are included:
Service
Repair services of personal and household goods
Commercial courier services (including multi-modal)
Electronic data interchange (EDI)

CPC Reference
633
7512
7523

Electronic mail
Enhanced/value-added facsimile services, including store and
forward, store and retrieve Code and protocol conversion
On-line information and data base retrieval
Voice mail
Real estate services on a fee or contract basis
Consultancy services related to the installation of computer hardware
Software implementation services, including systems and software
consulting services, systems analysis, design, programming and
maintenance services
Data processing services, including processing, tabulation and
facilities management services
On-line information and/or data processing (including transaction
processing)
Data base services
Maintenance and repair services of office machinery and equipment
including computers
Other computer services
General management consulting services
Marketing management consulting services
Human resources management consulting services
Production management consulting services
Services related to management consulting (except arbitration and
conciliation services)
Architectural services
Engineering services
Integrated engineering services (excluding 86731 Integrated
engineering services for transportation infrastructure turnkey
projects)
Urban planning and landscape architectural services
Technical testing and analysis services including quality control and
inspection (except with reference to FSC 58 and transportation
equipment)
505

822
841
842

843

844
845
849
86501
86503
86504
86505
866
8671
8672
8673

8674
8676

Building-cleaning services
Repair services incidental to metal products, machinery and
equipment
Sewage and refuse disposal, sanitation and similar services

874
8861
to 8864,
and 8866
94

Notes to the European Union’s Annex 19-5

1.

For procuring entities covered under Annex 19-2, the thresholds will be SDR
355,000 when an entity procures consulting services regarding matters of a
confidential nature, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to
compromise government confidences, cause economic disruption or similarly be
contrary to public interest.

2.

This Chapter does not apply to services which entities have to procure from another
entity pursuant to an exclusive right established by a published law, regulation or
administrative provision.

3.

The European Union stands ready, should the ongoing revision of European Union
legislation on public procurement result in a widening of the scope of services and
services concessions covered by that legislation, to take up negotiations with Canada
in view of extending the mutual coverage of services and services concessions of this
Chapter.

506

ANNEX 19-6
Construction services and works concessions
Section A: Construction services
Definition:
A construction services contract is a contract which has as its objective the realisation by whatever
means of civil or building works, in the sense of Division 51 of the CPC.
List of Division 51, CPC:

All services listed in Division 51.
Section B: Works concessions
Works concessions contracts, when awarded by entities listed in Annexes 19-1 and 19-2, are
subject only to Articles 19.1, 19.2, 19.4, 19.5, 19.6 (except subparagraphs 3 (e) and (l)), 19.15
(except paragraphs 3 and 4) and 19.17 of the Chapter.

507

ANNEX 19-7
General Notes
1.

This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a)

(i)

procurement of agricultural products made in furtherance of agricultural
support programmes and human feeding programmes (for example food
aid, including urgent relief aid); and

(ii)

procurement for the acquisition, development, production or coproduction of programme material by broadcasters and contracts for
broadcasting time;

(b)

contracts awarded by procuring entities covered under Annexes 19-1 and 19-2
in connection with activities in the fields of drinking water, energy, transport
and the postal sector, unless covered under Annex 19-3;

(c)

procurement related to shipbuilding and maintainance by
(i)

procuring entities covered under Annex 19-3;

(ii)

bodies governed by public law covered under Annex 19-2; and

(iii) local contracting authorities covered in Section B of Annex 19-2 (identified
therein as administrative units NUTS 3 and smaller); or
(d)
2.

goods and services that are procured by a covered entity internally or that are supplied
by one covered entity to another.

In respect of the Åland Islands, the special conditions of Protocol No 2 on the Åland

Islands to the Treaty of Accession of Finland to the European Union shall apply.
3.

The European Union will provide to Canadian suppliers access to pre-contractual
remedies under Article 19.17 of this Chapter for the first ten years after the entry into
force of this Agreement. Thereafter the access of Canadian suppliers to pre-contractual
remedies will be made dependent on the outcome of the negotiations provided for under
Article 19.17.8.

508

ANNEX 19-8
Publication Media
Section A:
Electronic or paper media utilised for the publication of laws, regulations, judicial decisions,
administrative rulings of general application, standard contract clauses, and procedures
regarding government procurement covered by this Agreement pursuant to Article 19.5:
1.

BELGIUM
1.1

Laws, royal regulations, ministerial regulations, ministerial circulars:
1.

1.2

Jurisprudence:
1.

2.

Laws and Regulations:
1.

2.2
2.3

http://www.sac.government.bg

Administrative rulings of general application and any procedure:
1.

http://www.aop.bg

2.

http://www.cpc.bg.

CZECH REPUBLIC
3.1

Laws and Regulations:
1.

3.2

Collection of Laws of the Czech Republic

Rulings of the Office for the Protection of Competition:
1.

Collection of Rulings of the Office for the Protection of Competition

DENMARK
4.1.

Laws and regulations:
1.

4.2
4.3

Ugeskrift for Retsvaesen

Administrative rulings and procedures:
1.

4.4

Lovtidende

Judicial decisions:
1.

Ministerialtidende

Rulings by the Danish Complaints Board for Public Procurement:
1.

5.

Държавен вестник (State Gazette)

Judicial decisions:
1.

4.

Pasicrisie

BULGARIA
2.1

3.

le Moniteur Belge

Kendelser fra Klagenævnet for Udbud

GERMANY
5.1

Legislation and regulations:

509

5.2

1.

Bundesgesetzblatt

2.

Bundesanzeiger

Judicial Decisions:
1.

6.

ESTONIA
6.1

Laws, regulations and administrative rulings of general application:
1.

6.2

Legislation and regulations:
1.

Epishmh efhmerida eurwpaikwn koinothtwn (Government Gazette of Greece)

SPAIN
9.1

Legislation:
1.

9.2

Boletin Oficial des Estado

Judicial rulings:
1.

10.

Iris Oifigiuil (Official Gazette of the Irish Government).

GREECE
8.1

9.

https://riigihanked.riik.ee

IRELAND
7.1

8.

Riigi Teataja - http://www.riigiteataja.ee

Procedures regarding government procurement:
1.

7.

Entscheidungsammlungen
des:
Bundesverfassungsgerichts;
Bundesgerichtshofs; Bundesverwaltungsgerichts Bundesfinanzhofs sowie der
Oberlandesgerichte

No official publication

FRANCE
10.1 Legislation:
1.

Journal Officiel de la République française

10.2 Jurisprudence:
1.

Recueil des arrêts du Conseil d'État

10.3 Revue des marchés publics
11.

CROATIA
11.1 Narodne novine - http://www.nn.hr

12.

ITALY
12.1 Legislation:
1.

Gazzetta Ufficiale

12.2 Jurisprudence:
1.
13.

No official publication

CYPRUS
13.1 Legislation:
1.

Επίσημη Εφημερίδα της Δημοκρατίας (Official Gazette of the Republic)

510

13.2 Judicial decisions:
1.
14.

Αποφάσεις Ανωτάτου Δικαστηρίου 1999 - Τυπογραφείο της Δημοκρατίας
(Decisions of the Supreme High Court - Printing Office)

LATVIA
14.1 Legislation:
1.

15.

Latvijas vēstnesis (Official Newspaper)

LITHUANIA
15.1 Laws, regulations and administrative provisions:
1.

Teisės aktų registras (Register of Legal Acts)

15.2 Judicial decisions, jurisprudence:

16.

1.

Bulletin of the Supreme Court of Lithuania "Teismų praktika"

2.

Bulletin of the Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania "Administracinių
teismų praktika"

LUXEMBOURG
16.1 Legislation:
1.

Memorial

16.2 Jurisprudence:
1.
17.

Pasicrisie

HUNGARY
17.1 Legislation:
1.

Magyar Közlöny (Official Journal of the Republic of Hungary)

17.2 Jurisprudence:
1.
18.

Közbeszerzési Értesítő - a Közbeszerzések Tanácsa Hivatalos Lapja (Public
Procurement Bulletin - Official Journal of the Public Procurement Council)

MALTA
18.1 Legislation:
1.

19.

Government Gazette

NETHERLANDS
19.1 Legislation:
1.

Nederlandse Staatscourant or Staatsblad

19.2 Jurisprudence:
1.
20.

No official publication

AUSTRIA
20.1 Legislation:
1.

Österreichisches Bundesgesetzblatt

2.

Amtsblatt zur Wiener Zeitung

20.2 Judicial decisions:

511

1.

21.

Entscheidungen
des
Verfassungsgerichtshofes,
Verwaltungsgerichtshofes,Obersten Gerichtshofes, der Oberlandesgerichte, des
Bundesverwaltungsgerichtes
und
der
Landesverwaltungsgerichte
http://ris.bka.gv.at/Judikatur/

POLAND
21.1 Legislation:
1.

Dziennik Ustaw Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej (Journal of Laws – Republic of
Poland)

21.2 Judicial decisions, jurisprudence:
1.

22.

"Zamówienia publiczne w orzecznictwie. Wybrane orzeczenia zespołu arbitrów
i Sądu Okręgowego w Warszawie" (Selection of judgments of arbitration panels
and Regional Court in Warsaw)

PORTUGAL
22.1 Legislation:
1.

Diário da República Portuguesa 1a Série A e 2a série

22.2 Judicial Publications:

23.

1.

Boletim do Ministério da Justiça

2.

Colectânea de Acordos do Supremo Tribunal Administrativo

3.

Colectânea de Jurisprudencia Das Relações

ROMANIA
23.1 Laws and Regulations:
1.

Monitorul Oficial al României (Official Journal of Romania)

23.2 Judicial decisions, administrative rulings of general application and any procedure:
1.
24.

http://www.anrmap.ro

SLOVENIA
24.1 Legislation:
1.

Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia

24.2 Judicial decisions:
1.
25.

No official publication

SLOVAKIA
25.1 Legislation:
1.

Zbierka zakonov (Collection of Laws)

25.2 Judicial decisions:
1.
26.

No official publication

FINLAND
26.1 Suomen Säädöskokoelma - Finlands Författningssamling (The Collection of the
Statutes of Finland)

27.

SWEDEN

512

27.1 Svensk Författningssamling (Swedish Code of Statutes)
30.

UNITED KINGDOM
28.1 Legislation:
1.

HM Stationery Office

28.2 Jurisprudence:
1.

Law Reports.

28.3 "Public Bodies":
1.

HM Stationery Office

Section B:
Electronic or paper media utilised for the publication of notices required by Articles 19.6,
19.8.7 and 19.15.2 pursuant to Article 19.5:
1.

2.

3.

BELGIUM
1.1

Official Journal of the European Union

1.2

Le Bulletin des Adjudications

1.3

Other publications in the specialized press

BULGARIA
2.1

Official Journal of the European Union

2.2

Държавен вестник (State Gazette) - http://dv.parliament.bg

2.3

Public Procurement Register - http://www.aop.bg

CZECH REPUBLIC
3.1

4.

DENMARK
4.1

5.

8.

9.

Official Journal of the European Union

ESTONIA
6.1

7.

Official Journal of the European Union

GERMANY
5.1

6.

Official Journal of the European Union

Official Journal of the European Union

IRELAND
7.1

Official Journal of the European Union

7.2

Daily Press: "Irish Independent", "Irish Times", "Irish Press", "Cork Examiner"

GREECE
8.1

Official Journal of the European Union

8.2

Publication in the daily, financial, regional and specialized press

SPAIN
9.1

Official Journal of the European Union
513

10.

FRANCE
10.1 Official Journal of the European Union
10.2 Bulletin officiel des annonces des marchés publics

11.

CROATIA
11.1 Official Journal of the European Union
11.2 Elektronički oglasnik javne nabave Republike Hrvatske (Electronic Public
Procurement Classifieds of the Republic of Croatia)

12.

ITALY
12.1 Official Journal of the European Union

13.

CYPRUS
13.1 Official Journal of the European Union
13.2 Official Gazette of the Republic
13.3 Local Daily Press

14.

LATVIA
14.1 Official Journal of the European Union
14.2 Latvijas vēstnesis (Official newspaper)

15.

LITHUANIA
15.1 Official Journal of the European Union
15.2 Centrinė viešųjų pirkimų informacinė sistema (Central Portal of Public
Procurement)
15.3 Information supplement "Informaciniai pranešimai" to the Official Gazette
("Valstybės žinios") of the Republic of Lithuania.

16.

LUXEMBOURG
16.1 Official Journal of the European Union
16.2 Daily Press

17.

HUNGARY
17.1 Official Journal of the European Union
17.2 Közbeszerzési Értesítő - a Közbeszerzések Tanácsa Hivatalos Lapja (Public
Procurement Bulletin - Official Journal of the Public Procurement Council)

18.

MALTA
18.1 Official Journal of the European Union
18.2 Government Gazette

19.

NETHERLANDS
19.1 Official Journal of the European Union

20.

AUSTRIA

514

20.1 Official Journal of the European Union
20.2 Amtsblatt zur Wiener Zeitung
21.

POLAND
21.1 Official Journal of the European Union
21.2 Biuletyn Zamówień Publicznych (Public Procurement Bulletin)

22.

PORTUGAL
22.1 Official Journal of the European Union.

23.

ROMANIA
23.1 Official Journal of the European Union
23.2 Monitorul Oficial al României (Official Journal of Romania)
23.3 Electronic System for Public Procurement - http://www.e-licitatie.ro

24.

SLOVENIA
24.1 Official Journal of the European Union
24.2 Portal javnih naročil - http://www.enarocanje.si/?podrocje=portal

25.

SLOVAKIA
25.1 Official Journal of the European Union
25.2 Vestnik verejneho obstaravania (Journal of Public Procurement)

26.

FINLAND
26.1 Official Journal of the European Union
26.2 Julkiset hankinnat Suomessa ja ETA-alueella, Virallisen lehden liite (Public
Procurement in Finland and at the EEA-area, Supplement to the Official
Gazette of Finland)

27.

SWEDEN
27.1 Official Journal of the European Union

28.

UNITED KINGDOM
28.1 Official Journal of the European Union

Section C:
Website address or addresses where Parties publish procurement statistics pursuant to Article
19.15.5 and notices concerning awarded contracts pursuant to Article 19.15.6:
1.

Notices concerning awarded contracts by entities listed in Annexes 19-1 through 193 of the European Union’s Market Access Schedule are published on the Official
Journal of the European Union, online version, Tenders Electronic Daily http://ted.europa.eu

515

ANNEX 20-A
Part A
Geographical Indications Identifying a Product Originating in the European Union
Indication

Transliteration
(for
information
purposes only)

Product Class

Place of Origin
(Territory, Region or
Locality)

České pivo

beer

Czech Republic

Žatecký Chmel

hops

Czech Republic

Bayerisches Bier

beer

Germany

Münchener Bier

beer

Germany

Hopfen aus der
Hallertau

hops

Germany

Nürnberger
Bratwürste**

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Germany

Nürnberger
Rostbratwürste

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Germany

Schwarzwälder
Schinken

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Germany

Aachener Printen

confectionery and
baked products

Germany

Nürnberger Lebkuchen

confectionery and
baked products

Germany

Lübecker Marzipan

confectionery and
baked products

Germany

Bremer Klaben

confectionery and
baked products

Germany

Hessicher Handkäse

cheeses

Germany

Hessicher Handkäs

cheeses

Germany

Terttnanger Hopfen

hops

Germany

516

Spreewälder Gurken

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Germany

Danablu

cheeses

Denmark

Ελιά Καλαμάτας

Elia Kalamatas

table and processed
olives

Greece

Μαστίχα Χίου

Masticha Chiou

confectionery and
baked products

Greece

Φέτα*

Feta

cheeses

Greece

Ελαιόλαδο Καλαμάτας

Kalamata olive
oil

oils and animal fats

Greece

Ελαιόλαδο Κολυμβάρι
Χανίων Κρήτης

Kolymvari
Chanion Kritis
Olive Oil

oils and animal fats

Greece

Ελαιόλαδο Σητείας
Λασιθίου Κρήτης

Sitia Lasithiou
Kritis Olive oil

oils and animal fats

Greece

Ελαιόλαδο Λακωνία

Olive Oil
Lakonia

oils and animal fats

Greece

Κρόκος Κοζάνης

Krokos Kozanis

spices

Greece

Κεφαλογραβιέρα

Kefalograviera

cheeses

Greece

Γραβιέρα Κρήτης

Graviera Kritis

cheeses

Greece

Γραβιέρα Νάξου

Graviera Naxou

cheeses

Greece

Μανούρι

Manouri

cheeses

Greece

Κασέρι

Kasseri

cheeses

Greece

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Greece

Φασόλια Γίγαντες
Ελέφαντες Καστοριάς

Fassolia
Gigantes
Elefantes
Kastorias

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Greece

Φασόλια Γίγαντες
Ελέφαντες Πρεσπών

Fassolia
Gigantes
Elefantes
Prespon Florinas

Κονσερβολιά Αμφίσσης

Konservolia

table and processed

Greece

517

Amfissis

olives

Loukoumi
Geroskipou

confectionery and
baked products

Cyprus

Baena

oils and animal fats

Spain

Sierra Mágina

oils and animal fats

Spain

Aceite del Baix EbreMontsía

oils and animal fats

Spain

Oli del Baix EbreMontsía

oils and animal fats

Spain

Aceite del Bajo Aragón

oils and animal fats

Spain

Antequera

oils and animal fats

Spain

Priego de Córdoba

oils and animal fats

Spain

Sierra de Cádiz

oils and animal fats

Spain

Sierra de Segura

oils and animal fats

Spain

Sierra de Cazorla

oils and animal fats

Spain

Siurana

oils and animal fats

Spain

Aceite de Terra Alta

oils and animal fats

Spain

Oli de Terra Alta

oils and animal fats

Spain

Les Garrigues

oils and animal fats

Spain

Estepa

oils and animal fats

Spain

Guijuelo

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Spain

Jamón de Huelva

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Spain

Jamón de Teruel

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Spain

Salchichón de Vic

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Spain

Λουκούμι Γεροσκήπου

518

Llonganissa de Vic

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Spain

Mahón-Menorca

cheeses

Spain

Queso Manchego

cheeses

Spain

Cítricos Valencianos

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Spain

Cîtrics Valancians

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Spain

Jijona

confectionery and
baked products

Spain

Turrón de Alicante

confectionery and
baked products

Spain

Azafrán de la Mancha

spices

Spain

Comté

cheeses

France

Reblochon

cheeses

France

Reblochon de Savoie

cheeses

France

Roquefort

cheeses

France

Camembert de
Normandie

cheeses

France

Brie de Meaux

cheeses

France

Emmental de Savoie

cheeses

France

Pruneaux d'Agen

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

France

Pruneaux d'Agen micuits

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

France

Huîtres de MarennesOléron

fresh, frozen and
processed fish
products

France

Canards à foie gras du
Sud-Ouest : Chalosse

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

France

519

Canards à foie gras du
Sud-Ouest: Gascogne

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

France

Canards à foie gras du
Sud-Ouest : Gers

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

France

Canards à foie gras du
Sud-Ouest : Landes

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

France

Canards à foie gras du
Sud-Ouest : Périgord

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

France

Canards à foie gras du
Sud-Ouest : Quercy

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

France

Jambon de Bayonne***

dry-cured meats

France

Huile d'olive de HauteProvence

oils and animal fats

France

Huile essentielle de
lavande de HauteProvence

essential oils

France

Morbier

cheeses

France

Epoisses

cheeses

France

Beaufort***

cheeses

France

Maroilles

cheeses

France

Marolles

cheeses

France

Munster *

cheeses

France

Munster Géromé

cheeses

France

Fourme d’Ambert

cheeses

France

Abondance

cheeses

France

Bleu d’Auvergne

cheeses

France

Livarot

cheeses

France

Cantal

cheeses

France

Fourme de Cantal

cheeses

France

520

Cantalet

cheeses

France

Petit Cantal

cheeses

France

Tomme de Savoie

cheeses

France

Pont - L'Evêque

cheeses

France

Neufchâtel

cheeses

France

Chabichou du Poitou

cheeses

France

Crottin de Chavignol

cheeses

France

Saint-Nectaire

cheeses

France

Piment d’Espelette

spices

France

Lentille verte du Puy

fresh and processed
vegetable products

France

Aceto balsamico
Tradizionale di Modena

vinegar

Italy

Aceto balsamico di
Modena

vinegar

Italy

Cotechino Modena

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Zampone Modena

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Bresaola della
Valtellina

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Mortadella Bologna

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Prosciutto di Parma

dry-cured meats

Italy

Prosciutto di S. Daniele

dry-cured meats

Italy

Prosciutto Toscano

dry-cured meats

Italy

Prosciutto di Modena

dry-cured meats

Italy

Provolone Valpadana

cheeses

Italy

521

Taleggio

cheeses

Italy

Asiago*

cheeses

Italy

Fontina*

cheeses

Italy

Gorgonzola*

cheeses

Italy

Grana Padano

cheeses

Italy

Mozzarella di Bufala
Campana

cheeses

Italy

Parmigiano Reggiano

cheeses

Italy

Pecorino Romano

cheeses

Italy

Pecorino Sardo

cheeses

Italy

Pecorino Toscano

cheeses

Italy

Arancia Rossa di Sicilia

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Italy

Cappero di Pantelleria

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Italy

Kiwi Latina

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Italy

Lenticchia di
Castelluccio di Norcia

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Italy

Mela Alto Adige

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Italy

Südtiroler Apfel

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Italy

Pesca e nettarina di
Romagna

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Italy

Pomodoro di Pachino

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Italy

Radicchio Rosso di
Treviso

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Italy

Ricciarelli di Siena

confectionery and

Italy

522

baked products
Riso Nano Vialone
Veronese

cereals

Italy

Speck Alto Adige

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Südtiroler Markenspeck

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Südtiroler Speck

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Veneto Valpolicella

oils and animal fats

Italy

Veneto Euganei e Berici

oils and animal fats

Italy

Veneto del Grappa

oils and animal fats

Italy

Culatello di Zibello

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Garda

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Lardo di Colonnata

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Italy

Szegedi téliszalámi

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Hungary

Szegedi szalámi

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Hungary

Tiroler Speck

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Austria

Steirischer Kren

fresh and processed
vegetable products

Austria

Steirisches Kürbiskernöl

oilseeds

Austria

Queijo S. Jorge

cheeses

Portugal

oils and animal fats

Portugal

oils and animal fats

Portugal

Azeite de Moura
Azeites de Trás-os-

523

Montes
Azeite do Alentejo
Interior

oils and animal fats

Portugal

Azeites da Beira Interior

oils and animal fats

Portugal

Azeites do Norte
Alentejano

oils and animal fats

Portugal

Azeites do Ribatejo

oils and animal fats

Portugal

Pêra Rocha do Oeste

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Portugal

Ameixa d'Elvas

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Portugal

Ananás dos Açores / S.
Miguel

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Portugal

Chouriça de carne de
Vinhais

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Portugal

Linguiça de Vinhais

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Portugal

Chouriço de Portalegre

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Portugal

Presunto de Barrancos

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Portugal

Queijo Serra da Estrela

Queijos da Beira Baixa
Queijo de Castelo
Branco

Portugal
cheeses
Portugal
cheeses
Portugal
cheeses

Queijo Amarelo da
Beira Baixa

cheeses

Portugal

Queijo Picante da Beira
Baixa

cheeses

Portugal

524

Salpicão de Vinhais

fresh, frozen and
processed meats

Portugal

Gouda Holland

cheeses

Netherlands

Edam Holland

cheeses

Netherlands
Sweden

Kalix Löjrom

fresh, frozen and
processed fish
products

Magiun de prune
Topoloveni

fresh and processed
fruits and nuts

Romania

525

Part B
Geographical Indications Identifying a Product Originating in Canada
Indication

Transliteration
Product Class
(For information
purposes only)

526

Place of Origin
(Territory, Region or
Locality)

ANNEX 20-B
Terms Referred to in Articles 20.19.11 and 20.19.12
Part A
Valencia Orange
Orange Valencia
Valencia
Black Forest Ham
Jambon Forêt Noire
Tiroler Bacon62
Bacon Tiroler2
Parmesan
Bavarian Beer
Bière Bavaroise
Munich Beer
Bière Munich
St. George Cheese
Fromage St-George[s]
Part B
The term "comté" in association with food products when used to refer to a county (for
example "Comté du Prince-Edouard"; "Prince Edward County"; "Comté de PrescottRussell"; "Prescott-Russell County").
The term “Beaufort” in association with cheese products, produced in the proximity of the
geographical place called "Beaufort range", Vancouver Island, British Columbia.

62

The use of spelling variations in English or French shall be permitted, including “Tyrol”, “Tiroler”,
“Tyroler”, and “Tirolien”.

527

ANNEX 20-C
Product Classes
1.

fresh, frozen and processed meats means products falling under Chapter 2 and
heading 16.01 or 16.02 of the Harmonized System.

2.

dry-cured meats means dry cured meat products falling under Chapter 2 and
heading 16.01 or 16.02 of the Harmonized System.

3.

hops means products falling under heading 12.10 of the Harmonized System;

4.

fresh, frozen and processed fish products means products falling under Chapter 3
and heading 16.03, 16.04 or 16.05 of the Harmonized System;

5.

butter means products falling under heading 04.05 of the Harmonized System;

6.

cheeses means products falling under heading 04.06 of the Harmonized System;

7.

fresh and processed vegetable products means products containing vegetables
falling under Chapter 7 and Chapter 20 of the Harmonized System;

8.

fresh and processed fruits and nuts means products containing fruits falling under
Chapter 8 and 20 of the Harmonized System;

9.

spices means products falling under Chapter 9 of the Harmonized System;

10.

cereals means products falling under Chapter 10 of the Harmonized System;

11.

products of the milling industry means products falling under Chapter 11 of the
Harmonized System;

12.

oilseeds means products falling under Chapter 12 of the Harmonized System;

13.

beverages from plant extracts means products falling under heading 13.02 of the
Harmonized System;

14.

oils and animal fats means products falling under Chapter 15 of the Harmonized
System;

15.

confectionery and baked products means products falling under heading 17.04,
18.06, 19.04, or 19.05 of the Harmonized System;

16.

pasta means products falling under heading 19.02 of the Harmonized System;

17.

table and processed olives means products falling under heading 20.01 or 20.05 of
the Harmonized System;

18.

mustard paste means products falling under sub-heading 2103.30 of the
Harmonized System;

19.

beer means products falling under heading 22.03 of the Harmonized System;

20.

vinegar means products falling under heading 22.09 of the Harmonized System;

21.

essential oils means products falling under heading 33.01 of the Harmonized
System.

528

ANNEX 29-A
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR ARBITRATION
Definitions and general provisions
1.

For this Chapter and under these Rules:
adviser means a natural person retained by a Party to advise or assist that Party in
connection with the arbitration proceeding;
arbitration panel means a panel established under Article 29.7;
arbitrator means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article 29.7;
assistant means a natural person who, under the terms of appointment of an
arbitrator conducts research for or provides assistance to the arbitrator;
day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specified;
legal holiday means every Saturday and Sunday and any other day designated by a
Party as a holiday for the purposes of these rules;
representative of a Party means an employee or any natural person appointed by a
government department or agency or any other public entity of a Party who
represents the Party for the purposes of a dispute under this Agreement;
responding Party means the Party that is alleged to be in violation of the provisions
referred to in Article 29.2; and
requesting Party means any Party that requests the establishment of an arbitration
panel under Article 29.6;

2.

The responding Party shall be in charge of the logistical administration of the
arbitration proceedings, in particular the organisation of hearings, unless otherwise
agreed. However, the Parties shall bear equally the administrative expenses of the
arbitration proceedings as well as the remuneration and all travel, lodging and
general expenses of the arbitrators and their assistants.
Notifications

3.

Unless agreed otherwise, the Parties and the arbitration panel shall transmit a request,
notice, written submission or other document by email, with a copy submitted on the
same day by facsimile transmission, registered post, courier, delivery against receipt
or any other means of telecommunication that provides a record of its sending.
Unless proven otherwise, an email message shall be deemed to be received on the
same date of its sending.

4.

When communicating in writing, a Party shall provide an electronic copy of its
communications to the other Party and to each of the arbitrators.

5.

Minor errors of a clerical nature in a request, notice, written submission or other
document related to the arbitration proceeding may be corrected by delivery of a new
document clearly indicating the changes.

6.

If the last day for delivery of a document falls on an official holiday or rest day in
Canada or in the European Union, the document may be delivered on the next

529

business day. No documents, notifications or requests of any kind shall be deemed to
be received on a legal holiday.
7.

Depending on the provisions under dispute, all requests and notifications addressed
to the CETA Joint Committee in accordance with this Chapter shall also be copied to
the other relevant institutional bodies.
Commencing the arbitration

8.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, they shall meet the arbitration panel within seven
working days of its establishment in order to determine such matters that the Parties
or the arbitration panel deem appropriate, including the remuneration and expenses
to be paid to the arbitrators, which shall be in accordance with WTO standards.
Remuneration for each arbitrator’s assistant shall not exceed 50 per cent of the total
remuneration of that arbitrator. Arbitrators and representatives of the Parties may
take part in this meeting via telephone or video conference.

9.

(a)

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within five working days of the date of the
establishment of the arbitration panel, the terms of reference of the arbitration
panel shall be:
“to examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement, the matter
referred to in the request for establishment of the arbitration panel, to rule on
the compatibility of the measure in question with the provisions referred to in
Article 29.2 and to make a ruling in accordance with Articles 29.10, 29.17 and
29.18.”

(b)

The Parties shall notify the agreed terms of reference to the arbitration panel
within three working days of their agreement.

(c)

The arbitration panel may rule on its own jurisdiction.
Initial submissions

10.

The requesting Party shall deliver its initial written submission no later than 10 days
after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. The responding Party shall
deliver its written counter-submission no later than 21 days after the date of delivery
of the initial written submission.
Working of arbitration panels

11.

The chairperson of the arbitration panel shall preside over all meetings. An
arbitration panel may delegate to the chairperson authority to make administrative
and procedural decisions.

12.

Hearings shall take place in person. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter and
without prejudice to paragraph 30, the arbitration panel may conduct its other
activities by any means, including telephone, facsimile transmissions or computer
links.

13.

Only arbitrators may take part in the deliberations of the arbitration panel, but the
arbitration panel may permit its assistants to be present at its deliberations.

14.

The drafting of any ruling shall remain the exclusive responsibility of the arbitration
panel and must not be delegated.

530

15.

Findings, determinations and recommendations of the arbitration panel under
Articles 29.9 and 29.10 should be made by consensus, but if consensus is not
possible then by a majority of its members.

16.

Arbitrators may not issue separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed.

17.

Where a procedural question arises that is not covered by the provisions of Chapter
Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement), the arbitration panel, after consulting with the
Parties, may adopt an appropriate procedure that is compatible with those provisions
and that ensures equal treatment between the Parties.

18.

If the arbitration panel considers that there is a need to modify any time limit
applicable in the proceedings or to make any other procedural or administrative
adjustment as may be required for the fairness or efficiency of the proceedings, it
shall inform the Parties in writing of the reasons for the modification or adjustment
and of the period or adjustment needed. The arbitration panel may adopt such
modification or adjustment after having consulted the Parties.

19.

Any time limit referred to in this Chapter and in this Annex may be modified by
mutual consent of the Parties. Upon request of a Party, the arbitration panel may
modify the time limits applicable in the proceedings.

20.

The arbitration panel shall suspend its work:
(a)

at the request of the requesting Party for a period specified in the request but
not to exceed 12 consecutive months, and shall resume its work at the request
of the requesting Party; or

(b)

after it has issued its interim report or in the case of a proceeding on a
disagreement on equivalence under Article 29.14 or a proceeding under Article
29.15, only upon the request of both Parties for a period specified in the
request, and shall resume its work at the request of either Party.

If there is no request for the resumption of the arbitration panel’s work by the end of
the period specified in the request for suspension, the proceeding shall be terminated.
The termination of the arbitration panel’s work is without prejudice to the rights of
the Parties in another proceeding on the same matter under Chapter Twenty-Nine
(Dispute Settlement).
Replacement
21.

If an arbitrator is unable to participate in the proceeding, withdraws, or must be
replaced, a replacement shall be selected in accordance with Article 29.7.3.

22.

Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of
the code of conduct of Annex 29-B (“Code of Conduct”) and for this reason must be
replaced, that Party shall notify the other Party within 15 days from the time it came
to know of the circumstances underlying the arbitrator’s non-compliance with the
Code of Conduct.

23.

Where a Party considers that an arbitrator other than the chairperson does not comply
with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, the Parties shall consult and, if they so
agree, replace the arbitrator and select a replacement following the procedure set out
in Article 29.7.3.

531

If the Parties fail to agree on the need to replace an arbitrator, any Party may request
that such matter be referred to the chairperson of the arbitration panel, whose
decision shall be final.
If, pursuant to such a request, the chairperson finds that an arbitrator does not comply
with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, she or he shall draw a new arbitrator
by lot from the names on the list referred to in Article 29.8.1 and on which the
original arbitrator was included. If the original arbitrator was chosen by the Parties
pursuant to Article 29.7, the replacement shall be drawn by lot from the individuals
proposed by the requesting Party and by the responding Party under Article 29.8.1.
The selection of the new arbitrator shall be made within five working days of the
date of the submission of the request to the chairperson of the arbitration panel.
24.

Where a Party considers that the chairperson of the arbitration panel does not comply
with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, the Parties shall consult and, if
they so agree, shall dismiss the chairperson and select a replacement following the
procedure set out in 29.7.3.
If the Parties fail to agree on the need to replace the chairperson, any Party may
request that such matter be referred to the two remaining arbitrators. The decision by
the arbitrators on the need to replace the chairperson shall be final.
If the arbitrators decide that the chairperson does not comply with the requirements
of the Code of Conduct, they shall draw a new chairperson by lot among the
remaining names on the list referred to in Article 29.8.1. The selection of the new
chairperson shall be made within five working days of the date of the submission of
the request referred to in this paragraph.
If the arbitrators cannot reach a decision within 10 days of the matter being referred
to them, the procedure set out in Article 29.7 shall apply.

25.

The arbitration proceedings shall be suspended for the period taken to carry out the
procedure provided for in paragraphs 21 through 24.
Hearings

26.

The chairperson shall fix the date and time of the hearing in consultation with the
Parties and the other arbitrators, and confirm this in writing to the Parties. This
information shall also be made publicly available by the Party in charge of the
logistical administration of the proceeding, subject to paragraph 39.

27.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the hearing shall be held in Brussels if the
requesting Party is Canada and in Ottawa if the requesting Party is the European
Union.

28.

As a general rule there should be only one hearing. The arbitration panel may on
its own initiative or on the request of a Party convene one additional hearing
when the dispute involves issues of exceptional complexity. No additional
hearing shall be convened for the procedures established under Articles 29.14 and
29.15, except in the case of a disagreement on compliance and equivalence.

29.

All arbitrators shall be present during the entirety of the hearing.

30.

The following persons may attend the hearing, irrespective of whether the
proceeding is open to the public or not:
532

(a)

representatives of the Parties;

(b)

advisers to the Parties;

(c)

administrative staff, interpreters, translators and court reporters; and

(d)

arbitrators’ assistants.

Only the representatives of and advisers to the Parties may address the arbitration
panel.
31.

No later than five working days before the date of a hearing, each Party shall deliver
to the arbitration panel and to the other Party a list of the names of persons who will
make oral arguments or presentations at the hearing on behalf of that Party and of
other representatives or advisers who will be attending the hearing.

32.

The arbitration panel shall conduct the hearing in the following manner, ensuring that
the requesting Party and the responding Party are afforded equal time:
Argument
(a)

argument of the requesting Party

(b)

argument of the responding Party

Rebuttal Argument
(a)

reply of the requesting Party

(b)

counter-reply of the responding Party

33.

The arbitration panel may direct questions to either Party at any time during the
hearing.

34.

The arbitration panel, after having received the comments of the Parties, shall issue
to the Parties a final transcript of each hearing.

35.

Each Party may deliver to the arbitrators and to the other Party a supplementary
written submission concerning any matter that arose during the hearing within 10
working days of the date of the hearing.
Questions in writing

36.

The arbitration panel may at any time during the proceeding address questions in
writing to one or both Parties. Each of the Parties shall receive a copy of any
questions put by the arbitration panel.

37.

Each Party shall also provide the other Party with a copy of its written response to
the questions of the arbitration panel. Each Party shall be given the opportunity to
provide written comments on the other Party’s reply within five working days of the
date of receipt.
Transparency and confidentiality

38.

Subject to paragraph 39, each Party shall make its submissions publicly available
and, unless the Parties decide otherwise, the hearings of the arbitration panel shall be
open to the public.

39.

The arbitration panel shall meet in closed session when the submission and
arguments of a Party contain confidential business information. The Parties shall
533

maintain the confidentiality of the arbitration panel hearings when they are held in
closed session. Each Party and its advisers shall treat as confidential any information
submitted by the other Party to the arbitration panel which that Party has designated
as confidential. Where a Party’s submission to the arbitration panel contains
confidential information, that Party shall also provide, within 15 days, a nonconfidential version of the submission that could be disclosed to the public.
Ex parte contacts
40.

The arbitration panel shall not meet or contact a Party in the absence of the other
Party.

41.

No arbitrator may discuss any aspect of the subject-matter of the proceeding with a
Party or the Parties in the absence of the other arbitrators.
Information and technical advice
42. Upon the request of a disputing Party, or on its own initiative, the arbitration
panel may seek information and technical advice from any person or body that it
deems appropriate, subject to any terms and conditions agreed by the Parties. Any
information obtained in this manner must be disclosed to each Party and submitted
for their comments.
Amicus curiae submissions

43.

Non-governmental persons established in a Party may submit amicus curiae briefs to
the arbitration panel in accordance with the following paragraphs.

44.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise within five days of the date of the establishment
of the arbitration panel, the arbitration panel may receive unsolicited written
submissions, provided that they are made within 10 days of the date of the
establishment of the arbitration panel, and in no case longer than 15 typed pages,
including any annexes, and that they are directly relevant to the issue under
consideration by the arbitration panel.

45.

The submission shall contain a description of the person making the submission,
whether natural or legal, including the nature of that person’s activities and the
source of that person’s financing, and specify the nature of the interest that that
person has in the arbitration proceeding. It shall be drafted in the languages chosen
by the Parties in accordance with paragraphs 48 and 49.

46.

The arbitration panel shall list in its ruling all the submissions it has received that
conform to the above rules. The arbitration panel shall not be obliged to address in its
ruling the arguments made in such submissions. The arbitration panel shall submit to
the Parties for their comments any submission it obtains.
Urgent cases

47.

In cases of urgency referred to in Article 29.11, the arbitration panel, after consulting
the Parties, shall adjust the time limits referred to in these rules as appropriate and
shall notify the Parties of such adjustments.
Working language for the proceeding, translation and interpretation

534

48.

During the consultations referred to in Article 29.7.2, and no later than the meeting
referred to in paragraph 8, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a common working
language for the proceeding before the arbitration panel.

49.

If the Parties are unable to agree on a common working language, each Party shall
arrange for and bear the costs of the translation of its written submissions into the
language chosen by the other Party. The responding Party shall arrange for the
interpretation of oral submissions into the languages chosen by the Parties.

50.

Arbitration panel rulings shall be issued in the language or languages chosen by the
Parties.

51.

Any costs incurred for translation of an arbitration panel ruling into the language or
languages chosen by the Parties shall be borne equally by the Parties.

52.

A Party may provide comments on the accuracy of the translation of any translated
version of a document drawn up in accordance with these rules.
Calculation of time limits

53.

All time limits set out in this Chapter and in this Annex including the limits for the
arbitration panels to notify their rulings, shall be counted in calendar days from the
day following the act or fact to which they refer, unless otherwise specified.

54.

Where, by reason of the application of paragraph 6, a Party receives a document on a
date other than the date on which this document is received by the other Party, any
period of time that is calculated on the basis of the date of receipt of that document
shall be calculated from the last date of receipt of that document.
Other procedures

55.

The time limits set out in these Rules of Procedure shall be adjusted in line with the
special time limits provided for the adoption of a ruling by the arbitration panel in the
proceedings under Articles 29.14 and 29.15.

56.

In the event that the original arbitration panel, or some of its arbitrators, are unable to
reconvene for the proceedings established under Article 29.14 and 29.15, the
procedure set out in Article 29.7 shall apply. The time limit for the notification of the
ruling shall be extended by 20 days.

535

ANNEX 29-B
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR ARBITRATORS AND MEDIATORS
Definitions
1.

For this Chapter and under this Code of Conduct:
assistant means a person who, under the terms of appointment of an arbitrator,
conducts, researches or provides assistance to the arbitrator;
candidate means an individual whose name is on the list of arbitrators referred to in
Article 29.8 and who is under consideration for selection as an arbitrator under
Article 29.7;
mediator means a person who conducts a mediation in accordance with Article 29.5;
arbitrator means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article 29.7;
proceeding, unless otherwise specified, means an arbitration proceeding;
staff, in respect of an arbitrator, means persons under the direction and control of the
arbitrator, other than assistants.
Responsibilities of candidates and arbitrators

2.

Every candidate and arbitrator shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of
impropriety, shall be independent and impartial, shall avoid direct and indirect
conflicts of interests and shall observe high standards of conduct so that the integrity
and impartiality of the dispute settlement mechanism is preserved. Former arbitrators
must comply with the obligations established in paragraphs 16 through 19.
Disclosure obligations

3.

Prior to confirmation of her or his selection as an arbitrator under this Chapter, a
candidate shall disclose any interest, relationship or matter that is likely to affect her
or his independence or impartiality or that might reasonably create an appearance of
impropriety or bias in the proceeding. To this end, a candidate shall make all
reasonable efforts to become aware of such interests, relationships and matters.

4.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, candidates shall disclose the
following interests, relationships and matters:
(1)

(2)

any financial interest of the candidate:
(a)

in the proceeding or in its outcome, and

(b)

in an administrative proceeding, a domestic court proceeding or another
panel or committee proceeding that involves issues that may be decided
in the proceeding for which the candidate is under consideration;

any financial interest of the candidate’s employer, partner, business associate
or family member:
(a)

in the proceeding or in its outcome, and

(b)

in an administrative proceeding, a domestic court proceeding or another
panel or committee proceeding that involves issues that may be decided
in the proceeding for which the candidate is under consideration;

536

(3)

any past or existing financial, business, professional, family or social
relationship with the interested parties in the proceeding, or their counsel, or
such relationship involving a candidate’s employer, partner, business associate
or family member; and

(4)

public advocacy or legal or other representation concerning an issue in dispute
in the proceeding or involving the same matters.

5.

A candidate or arbitrator shall communicate matters concerning actual or potential
violations of this Code of Conduct to the CETA Joint Committee for consideration
by the Parties.

6.

Once selected, an arbitrator shall continue to make all reasonable efforts to become
aware of interests, relationships or matters referred to in paragraph 3 and shall
disclose them. The disclosure obligation is a continuing duty which requires an
arbitrator to disclose such interests, relationships or matters that may arise during all
stages of the proceeding. The arbitrator shall disclose such interests, relationships or
matters by informing the CETA Joint Committee promptly, in writing, for
consideration by the Parties.
Duties of arbitrators

7.

Upon selection an arbitrator shall be available to perform and shall perform her or his
duties thoroughly and expeditiously throughout the course of the proceeding, and
with fairness and diligence.

8.

An arbitrator shall consider only those issues raised in the proceeding and necessary
for a ruling and shall not delegate this duty to any other person.

9.

An arbitrator shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that her or his assistant and
staff are aware of, and comply with, paragraphs 2 through 6, and 17 through 19.

10.

An arbitrator shall not engage in ex parte contacts concerning the proceeding.
Independence and impartiality of arbitrators

11.

An arbitrator shall avoid creating an appearance of bias and shall not be influenced
by self-interest, outside pressure, political considerations, public clamour, loyalty to
a Party, or fear of criticism.

12.

An arbitrator shall not, directly or indirectly, incur any obligation or accept any
benefit that would in any way interfere, or appear to interfere, with the proper
performance of her or his duties.

13.

An arbitrator may not use her or his position on the arbitration panel to advance any
personal or private interests and shall avoid actions that may create the impression
that others are in a special position to influence her or him.

14.

An arbitrator may not allow financial, business, professional, family or social
relationships or responsibilities to influence her or his conduct or judgement.

15.

An arbitrator must avoid entering into any relationship or acquiring any financial
interest that is likely to affect her or his impartiality or that might reasonably create
an appearance of impropriety or bias.
Obligations of former arbitrators

537

16.

All former arbitrators must avoid actions that may create the appearance that they
were biased in carrying out their duties or derived advantage from the decision or
ruling of the arbitration panel.
Confidentiality

17.

No arbitrator or former arbitrator shall at any time disclose or use any non-public
information concerning a proceeding or acquired during a proceeding except for the
purposes of that proceeding and shall not, in any case, disclose or use any such
information to gain personal advantage or advantage for others or to adversely affect
the interest of others.

18.

An arbitrator shall not disclose an arbitration panel ruling or parts thereof prior to its
publication in accordance with this Chapter.

19.

An arbitrator or former arbitrator shall not at any time disclose the deliberations of an
arbitration panel, or any member’s view.
Expenses

20.

Each arbitrator shall keep a record and render a final account of the time devoted to
the procedure and of her or his expenses as well as the time and expenses of her or
his assistant.
Mediators

21.

This Code of Conduct applies, mutatis mutandis, to mediators.

538

ANNEX 29-C
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR MEDIATION
Article 1
Objective
Further to Article 29.5, the objective of this Annex is to facilitate the finding of a mutually
agreed solution through a comprehensive and expeditious procedure with the assistance of a
mediator.
SECTION A
Mediation proceeding
Article 2
Initiation of the proceeding
1.

2.

A Party may request, at any time, that the Parties enter into a mediation proceeding.
Such request shall be addressed to the other Party in writing. The request shall be
sufficiently detailed to present clearly the concerns of the requesting Party and shall:
(a)

identify the specific measure at issue;

(b)

provide a statement of the alleged adverse effects that the requesting Party
believes the measure has, or will have, on trade or investment between the
Parties; and

(c)

explain how the requesting Party considers that those effects are linked to the
measure.

The mediation proceeding may only be initiated by mutual consent of the Parties.
When a Party requests mediation pursuant to paragraph 1, the other Party shall give
good faith consideration to the request and reply in writing within 10 days of
receiving it.
Article 3
Selection of the mediator

1.

Upon the start of the mediation proceeding, the Parties shall agree on a mediator, if
possible, no later than 15 days after the receipt of the reply to the request for
mediation.

2.

A mediator shall not be a citizen of either Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

3.

The mediator shall assist, in an impartial and transparent manner, the Parties in
bringing clarity to the measure and its possible trade effects, and in reaching a
mutually agreed solution. Further to paragraph 21 of Annex 29-B, the Code of
Conduct of Arbitrators and Mediators applies to mediators. Paragraphs 3 through 7
and 48 through 54 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration in Annex 29-A shall also
apply, mutatis mutandis.

539

Article 4
Rules of procedure for mediation
1.

Within 10 days after the appointment of the mediator, the Party requesting the
mediation procedure shall present, in writing, a detailed description of the problem to
the mediator and to the other Party, in particular of the operation of the measure at
issue and its trade effects. Within 20 days after the date of delivery of this
submission, the other Party may provide, in writing, its comments to the description
of the problem. Either Party may include in its description or comments any
information that it deems relevant.

2.

The mediator may decide on the most appropriate way of bringing clarity to the
measure concerned and its possible trade-related impact. In particular, the mediator
may organise meetings between the Parties, consult the Parties jointly or
individually, seek the assistance of or consult with relevant experts63 and
stakeholders and provide any additional support requested by the Parties. However,
before seeking the assistance of or consulting with relevant experts and stakeholders,
the mediator shall consult with the Parties.

3.

The mediator may offer advice and propose a solution for the consideration of the
Parties which may accept or reject the proposed solution or may agree on a different
solution. However, the mediator may not advise or comment on the consistency of
the measure at issue with this Agreement.

4.

The procedure shall take place in the territory of the Party to which the request was
addressed, or, by mutual consent of the Parties, in any other location or by any other
means.

5.

The Parties shall endeavour to reach a mutually agreed solution within 60 days from
the appointment of the mediator. Pending a final agreement, the Parties may consider
possible interim solutions, especially if the measure relates to perishable goods.

6.

The solution may be adopted by means of a decision of the CETA Joint Committee.
Mutually agreed solutions shall be made publicly available. However, the version
disclosed to the public may not contain any information that a Party has designated
as confidential.

7.

On request of the Parties, the mediator shall issue to the Parties, in writing, a draft
factual report, providing a brief summary of the measure at issue in the proceeding,
the procedure followed and any mutually agreed solution reached as the final
outcome of the proceeding, including possible interim solutions. The mediator shall
provide the Parties 15 days to comment on the draft report. After considering the
comments of the Parties submitted within the period, the mediator shall submit, in
writing, a final factual report to the Parties within 15 days. The factual report shall
not include any interpretation of this Agreement.

8.

The proceeding shall be terminated:

63

A Party may not object to an expert being consulted in a dispute settlement proceeding under this
Chapter or under the WTO Agreement solely on the ground that the expert has been consulted under
this paragraph.

540

(a)

by the adoption of a mutually agreed solution by the Parties, on the date of
adoption.

(b)

by a written declaration of the mediator, after consulting with the Parties, that
further efforts at mediation would be to no avail;

(c)

by a written declaration of a Party after exploring mutually agreed solutions
under the mediation proceeding and after having considered any advice and
proposed solutions by the mediator. Such declaration may not be issued before
the period set out in Article 4.5 has expired; or

(d)

at any stage of the procedure by mutual agreement of the Parties.
SECTION B
Implementation
Article 5
Implementation of a mutually agreed solution

1.

Where the Parties have agreed to a solution, each Party shall take the measures
necessary to implement the mutually agreed solution within the agreed timeframe.

2.

The implementing Party shall inform the other Party in writing of any steps or
measures taken to implement the mutually agreed solution.
SECTION C
General provisions
Article 6
Confidentiality and relationship to dispute settlement

1.

Unless the Parties agree otherwise, and without prejudice to Article 4.6, all stages of
the proceeding, including any advice or proposed solution, are confidential.
However, any Party may disclose to the public that mediation is taking place. The
obligation of confidentiality does not extend to factual information already existing
in the public domain.

2.

The mediation proceeding is without prejudice to the Parties’ rights and obligations
under the provisions on Dispute Settlement in this Agreement or any other
agreement.

3.

Consultations are not required before initiating the mediation proceeding. However,
a Party should normally avail itself of the other relevant cooperation or consultation
provisions in this Agreement before initiating the mediation proceeding.

4.

A Party shall not rely on or introduce as evidence in other dispute settlement
proceedings under this Agreement or any other agreement, nor shall an arbitration
panel take into consideration:
(a)

positions taken by the other Party in the course of the mediation proceeding or
information gathered under Article 4.2;

541

5.

(b)

the fact that the other Party has indicated its willingness to accept a solution to
the measure subject to mediation; or

(c)

advice given or proposals made by the mediator.

A mediator may not serve as a panellist in a dispute settlement proceeding under this
Agreement or under the WTO Agreement involving the same matter for which she or
he has been a mediator.
Article 7
Time limits

Any time limit referred to in this Annex may be modified by mutual consent between the
Parties.
Article 8
Costs
1.

Each Party shall bear its costs of participation in the mediation proceeding.

2.

The Parties shall share jointly and equally the costs of organisational matters,
including the remuneration and expenses of the mediator. Remuneration of the
mediator shall be in accordance with that of the chairperson of an arbitration panel in
paragraph 8 of Annex 29-A.
Article 9
Review

Five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall consult each
other on the need to modify the mediation mechanism in light of the experience gained and
the development of any corresponding mechanism in the WTO.

542

ANNEX 30-A
LIST OF BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATIES BETWEEN CANADA AND
MEMBER STATES OF THE EUROPEAN UNION
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Government of
Canada for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, done at Ottawa on 3 February 1997.
Agreement between the Czech Republic and Canada for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, done at Prague on 6 May 2009.
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Hungary and the Government of
Canada for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, done at Ottawa on 3
October 1991.
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Latvia and the Government of Canada
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, done at Riga on 5 May 2009.
Exchange of Notes between the Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic
of Malta Constituting an Agreement Relating to Foreign Investment Insurance, done at
Valletta on 24 May 1982.
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Poland and the Government of
Canada for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, done at Warsaw on 6
April 2009.
Agreement between the Government of Romania and the Government of Canada for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, done at Bucharest on 8 May 2009.
Agreement between the Slovak Republic and the Government of Canada for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments, done at Bratislava on 20 July 2010.

543

ANNEX 30-B
AMENDMENTS TO THE 1989 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AGREEMENT AND
THE 2003 WINES AND SPIRIT DRINKS AGREEMENT
SECTION A
Article 1 of the 1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement, as amended by Annex VIII to the 2003
Wines and Spirit Drinks Agreement, shall have the following definition added:
““competent authority” means a government or commission, board or other governmental
agency of a Party that is authorised by law to control the sale of wines and distilled spirits.”
SECTION B
Article 2.2(b) of the 1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement, as amended by Annex VIII to the
2003 Wines and Spirit Drinks Agreement, is replaced with:
“(b) requiring off site private wine store outlets in Ontario and British Columbia to
sell only wines produced by Canadian wineries. The number of these off site private
wine store outlets authorised to sell only wines produced by Canadian wineries in
these provinces shall not exceed 292 in Ontario and 60 in British Columbia.”
SECTION C
Article 4 of the 1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement, as amended by Annex VIII to the 2003
Wines and Spirit Drinks Agreement, is replaced with:
“Article 4
Commercial Treatment
1.

Competent authorities shall, in exercising their responsibilities for the
purchase, distribution and retail sale of products of the other Party, adhere to
the provisions of GATT Article XVII concerning State trading enterprises, in
particular to make any such decisions solely in accordance with commercial
considerations and shall afford the enterprises of the other Party adequate
opportunity, in accordance with customary business practice, to compete for
participation in such purchases.

2.

Each Party shall take all possible measures to ensure that an enterprise that has
been granted a monopoly in the trade and sale of wines and spirit drinks within
its territory does not use its monopoly position to engage, either directly or
indirectly, including through its dealings with its parent, subsidiaries or other
enterprises with common ownership, in the sale of wine and spirit drinks in a
market outside the territory where the enterprise has a monopoly position that
causes an anti-competitive effect causing an appreciable restriction of
competition in that market.”
SECTION D

Article 4a of the 1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement, as amended by Annex VIII to the
2003 Wines and Spirit Drinks Agreement, is replaced with:
“4a – Pricing

544

1.

Competent authorities of the Parties shall ensure that any mark-up, cost of
service or other pricing measure is non-discriminatory, applies to all retail sales
and is in conformity with Article 2.

2.

A cost of service differential may be applied to products of the other Party only
in so far as it is no greater than the additional costs necessarily associated with
the marketing of products of the other Party, taking into account additional
costs resulting from, inter alia, delivery methods and frequency.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that a cost of service is not applied to a product of the
other Party on the basis of the value of the product.

4.

The cost of service differential shall be justified in line with standard
accounting procedures by independent auditors on the basis of an audit
completed on the request of the other Party within one year of the entry into
force of the 2003 Wines and Spirit Drinks Agreement and thereafter on request
of that Party at intervals of not less than four years. The audits shall be made
available to either Party within one year of a request being made.

5.

Competent authorities shall update cost of service differential charges, as
required, to reflect the commitment made in subparagraph 4a(2).

6.

Competent authorities shall make available applicable cost of service
differential charges through publicly accessible means, such as their official
website.

7.

Competent authorities shall establish a contact point for questions and concerns
originating from the other Party with respect to cost of service differential
charges. A Party will respond to a request from the other Party in writing
within 60 days of the receipt of the request.”
SECTION E

The 1989 Alcoholic Beverages Agreement, as amended by Annex VIII to the 2003 Wines and
Spirit Drinks Agreement, is modified by adding Article 4b:
“Article 4b
Blending Requirements
Neither Party may adopt or maintain any measure requiring that distilled spirits
imported from the territory of the other Party for bottling be blended with any
distilled spirits of the importing Party.”
SECTION F
The 2003 Wines and Spirit Drinks Agreement shall be amended as follows:
(a)

Article 27.3 (Joint Committee), first indent, is replaced with “adopting
amendments to the Annexes of this Agreement by means of a decision by the
Joint Committee.”

(b)

Title VIII (Dispute settlement) is deleted;

(c)

The last two sentences of Article 8.1 (Objection procedure) are replaced with
“A Contracting Party may seek consultations as provided under Article 29.4
(Consultations) of the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and

545

Trade Agreement (“CETA”). If the consultations fail to resolve the matter, a
Contracting Party may notify, in writing, the other Contracting Party of its
decision to refer the issue to arbitration under Articles 29.6 through 29.10 of
CETA.”
(d)

Article 9.2 (Modification of Annex I), is replaced with: “By way of derogation
from paragraph 1, if a Contracting Party has invoked the objection procedure
provided for in Article 8 (Objection procedure), the Contracting Parties shall
act in accordance with the outcome of the consultations, unless the matter is
referred to the arbitration procedure under Articles 29.6 through 29.10 of
CETA, in which case:

(e)

When Articles 29.6 through 29.10 of CETA are applied in the course of the
procedure referred to in Article 9.2 of the 2003 Wines and Spirit Drinks
Agreement, they shall apply mutatis mutandis.”

546

ANNEX 30-C
JOINT DECLARATION ON WINES AND SPIRITS
The Parties acknowledge the effort and progress that has been made on Wines and Spirits in
the context of the negotiations of this Agreement. These efforts have led to mutually agreed
solutions on a number of issues of high importance.
The Parties agree to discuss through the appropriate mechanisms, without delay and in view
to find mutually agreed solutions, any other issue of concern related to Wines and Spirits, and
notably the desire of the European Union to seek the elimination of the differentiation of
provincial mark-ups applied on domestic wines and wines bottled in Canada in private wine
outlets.
At the end of the fifth year following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties agree
to review the progress made on the elimination of the differentiation referred to in the
previous paragraph, based on the examination of all developments in the sector, including the
consequences of any granting to third countries of a more favourable treatment in the
framework of other trade negotiations involving Canada.

547

ANNEX 30-D
JOINT DECLARATION OF THE PARTIES ON COUNTRIES THAT HAVE
ESTABLISHED A CUSTOMS UNION WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION
1.

The European Union recalls the obligations of the countries that have
established a customs union with the European Union to align their trade regime
to that of the European Union, and for certain of them, to conclude preferential
agreements with countries that have preferential agreements with the European
Union.

2.

In this context, Canada shall endeavour to start negotiations with the countries
which,
(a)

have established a customs union with the European Union, and

(b)

whose products do not benefit from the tariff concessions under this
Agreement,

with a view to conclude a comprehensive bilateral agreement establishing a free
trade area in accordance with the relevant WTO Agreement provisions on goods
and services, provided that those countries agree to negotiate an ambitious and
comprehensive agreement comparable to this Agreement in scope and ambition.
Canada shall endeavour to start negotiations as soon as possible with a view to
have such an agreement enter into force as soon as possible after the entry into
force of this Agreement.

548

Protocol on rules of origin and origin procedures
SECTION A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs,
crustaceans, other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as eggs,
fry, fingerlings and larvae, by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to enhance
production, such as regular stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;
classified means the classification of a product under a particular heading or subheading
of the HS;
customs authority means any governmental authority that is responsible under the law
of a Party for the administration and application of customs laws or, for the EU, where
provided for, the competent services of the European Commission;
customs value means the value as determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation
Agreement;
determination of origin means a determination as to whether a good qualifies as an
originating good in accordance with this Protocol;
exporter means an exporter located in the territory of a Party;
identical originating products means products that are the same in all respects,
including physical characteristics, quality, and reputation, irrespective of minor
differences in appearance that are not relevant to a determination of origin of those
products under this Protocol;
importer means an importer located in the territory of a Party;
material means any ingredient, component, part, or product that is used in the production
of another product;
net weight of non-originating material means the weight of the material as it is used in
the production of the product, not including the weight of the material’s packaging;
net weight of the product means the weight of a product not including the weight of
packaging. In addition, if the production includes a heating or drying operation, the net
weight of the product may be the net weight of all materials used in its production,
excluding water of heading 22.01 added during production of the product;

549

producer means a person who engages in any kind of working or processing including
such operations as growing, mining, raising, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting,
manufacturing, assembling, or disassembling a product;
product means the result of production, even if it is intended for use as a material in the
production of another product;
production means any kind of working or processing, including such operations as
growing, mining, raising, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting, manufacturing,
assembling, or disassembling a product;
transaction value or ex-works price of the product means the price paid or payable to
the producer of the product at the place where the last production was carried out, and
must include the value of all materials. If there is no price paid or payable or if it does not
include the value of all materials, the transaction value or ex-works price of the product:
(a)

must include the value of all materials and the cost of production employed in
producing the product, calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles; and

(b)

may include amounts for general expenses and profit to the producer that can be
reasonably allocated to the product.

Any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported
are excluded. If the transaction value or ex-works price of the product includes costs
incurred subsequent to the product leaving the place of production, such as transportation,
loading, unloading, handling, or insurance, those costs are to be excluded; and
value of non-originating materials means the customs value of the material at the time
of its importation into a Party, as determined in accordance with the Customs Valuation
Agreement. The value of the non-originating material must include any costs incurred in
transporting the material to the place of importation, such as transportation, loading,
unloading, handling, or insurance. If the customs value is not known or cannot be
ascertained, the value of non-originating materials will be the first ascertainable price
paid for the materials in the European Union or in Canada.
SECTION B
RULES OF ORIGIN
Article 2
General requirements
1.

For the purposes of this Agreement, a product is originating in the Party where
the last production took place if, in the territory of a Party or in the territory of
both of the Parties in accordance with Article 3, the product:
(a)

has been wholly obtained within the meaning of Article 4;

(b)

has been produced exclusively from originating materials; or
550

(c)
2.

has undergone sufficient production within the meaning of Article 5.

Except as provided for in paragraphs 8 and 9 of Article 3, the conditions set out
in this Protocol relating to the acquisition of originating status must be fulfilled
without interruption in the territory of one or both of the Parties.
Article 3
Cumulation of origin

1.

A product that originates in a Party is considered originating in the other Party
when used as a material in the production of a product in that other Party.

2.

An exporter may take into account production carried out on a non-originating
material in the other Party for the purposes of determining the originating status
of a product.

3.

Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply if the production carried out on a product does
not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 7 and the object of this
production, as demonstrated on the basis of a preponderance of evidence, is to
circumvent financial or fiscal legislation of the Parties.

4.

If an exporter has completed an origin declaration for a product referred to in
paragraph 2, the exporter must possess a completed and signed supplier’s
statement from the supplier of the non-originating materials used in the
production of the product.

5.

A supplier’s statement may be the statement set out in Annex 3 or an equivalent
document that contains the same information describing the non-originating
materials concerned in sufficient detail for their identification.

6.

If a supplier's statement referred to in paragraph 4 is in electronic format, it does
not need to be signed, provided that the supplier is identified to the satisfaction
of the customs authorities in the Party where the supplier's statement was
completed.

7.

A supplier’s statement applies to a single invoice or multiple invoices for the
same material that is supplied within a period that does not exceed 12 months
from the date set out in the supplier’s statement.

8.

Subject to paragraph 9, if, as permitted by the WTO Agreement, each Party has a
free trade agreement with the same third country, a material of that third country
may be taken into consideration by the exporter when determining whether a
product is originating under this Agreement.

9.

Each Party shall apply paragraph 8 only if equivalent provisions are in force
between each Party and the third country and upon agreement by the Parties on
the applicable conditions.

551

10.

Notwithstanding paragraph 9, if each Party has a free trade agreement with the
United States, and upon agreement by both Parties on the applicable conditions,
each Party shall apply paragraph 8 when determining whether a product of
Chapter 2 or 11, heading 16.01 through 16.03, Chapter 19, heading 20.02 or
20.03, or subheading 3505.10 is originating under this Agreement.
Article 4
Wholly obtained products

1.

The following products shall be considered as wholly obtained in a Party:
(a)

mineral products and other non-living natural resources extracted or taken
from there;

(b)

vegetables, plants, and plant products harvested or gathered there;

(c)

live animals born and raised there;

(d)

products obtained from live animals there;

(e)

products from slaughtered animals born and raised there;

(f)

products obtained by hunting, trapping, or fishing conducted there, but not
beyond the outer limits of the Party’s territorial sea;

(g)

products of aquaculture raised there;

(h)

fish, shellfish, and other marine life taken beyond the outer limits of any
territorial sea by a vessel;

(i)

products made aboard factory ships exclusively from products referred to
in subparagraph (f);

(j)

mineral products and other non-living natural resources, taken or extracted
from the seabed, subsoil, or ocean floor of:
(i)

the exclusive economic zone of Canada or the European Union’s
Member States, as determined by domestic law and consistent with
Part V of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done
at Montego Bay on 10 December 1982 (“UNCLOS”);

(ii)

the continental shelf of Canada or the European Union’s Member
States, as determined by domestic law and consistent with Part VI of
UNCLOS; or

(iii) the Area as defined in Article 1(1) of UNCLOS,
by a Party or a person of a Party, provided that that Party or person of a
Party has rights to exploit such seabed, subsoil, or ocean floor;
(k)

raw materials recovered from used products collected there, provided that
these products are fit only for such recovery;
552

(l)

components recovered from used products collected there, provided that
these products are fit only for such recovery, when the component is:
(i)

incorporated into another product; or

(ii)

further produced resulting in a product with a performance and life
expectancy equivalent or similar to those of a new product of the
same type;

(m) products, at any stage of production, produced there exclusively from
products specified in subparagraphs (a) through (j).
2.

For the purpose of subparagraphs 1(f) and (g), the following conditions apply to
the vessel or factory ship:
(a)

the vessel or factory ship must be:
(i)

registered in a Member State of the European Union or in Canada; or

(ii)

listed in Canada, if such vessel:
(A) immediately prior to its listing in Canada, is entitled to fly the
flag of a Member State of the European Union and must sail
under that flag; and
(B)

fulfills the conditions of sub-subparagraphs 2(b)(i) or 2(b)(ii);

(iii) the vessel or factory ship must be entitled to fly the flag of a Member
State of the European Union or of Canada and must sail under that
flag; and
(b)

(c)

with respect to the European Union, the vessel or factory ship must be:
(i)

at least 50 per cent owned by nationals of a Member State of the
European Union; or

(ii)

owned by companies that have their head office and their main place
of business in a Member State of the European Union, and that are at
least 50 per cent owned by a Member State of the European Union,
public entities or nationals of those States; or

with respect to Canada, the vessel or factory ship must take the fish,
shellfish, or other marine life under the authority of a Canadian fishing
licence. Canadian fishing licences include Canadian commercial fishing
licences and Canadian aboriginal fishing licences issued to aboriginal
organisations. The holder of the Canadian fishing licence must be:
(i)

a Canadian national;

(ii)

an enterprise that is no more than 49 per cent foreign owned and has
a commercial presence in Canada;

553

(iii) a fishing vessel owned by a person referred to in sub-subparagraph
(i) or (ii) that is registered in Canada, entitled to fly the flag of
Canada and must sail under that flag; or
(iv) an aboriginal organisation located in the territory of Canada. A
person fishing under the authority of a Canadian aboriginal fishing
licence must be a Canadian national.
Article 5
Sufficient production
1.

For the purpose of Article 2, products that are not wholly obtained are
considered to have undergone sufficient production when the conditions set out
in Annex 5 are fulfilled.

2.

If a non-originating material undergoes sufficient production, the resulting
product shall be considered as originating and no account shall be taken of the
non-originating material contained therein when that product is used in the
subsequent production of another product.
Article 6
Tolerance

1.

Notwithstanding Article 5.1, and except as provided in paragraph 3, if the nonoriginating materials used in the production of a product do not fulfil the
conditions set out in Annex 5, the product shall be considered an originating
product provided that:
(a)

the total value of those non-originating materials does not exceed 10 per
cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product;

(b)

any of the percentages given in Annex 5 for the maximum value or weight
of non-originating materials are not exceeded through the application of
this paragraph; and

(c)

the product satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Protocol.

2.

Paragraph 1 does not apply to products wholly obtained in a Party within the
meaning of Article 4. If the rule of origin specified in Annex 5 requires that the
materials used in the production of a product be wholly obtained, the tolerance
provided for in paragraph 1 applies to the sum of these materials.

3.

Tolerance for textile and apparel products of Chapter 50 through 63 of the HS
shall be determined in accordance with Annex 1.

4.

Paragraphs 1 through 3 are subject to Article 8(c).

554

Article 7
Insufficient production
1.

Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations are insufficient to
confer origin on a product, whether or not the requirements of Articles 5 or 6 are
satisfied:
(a)

operations exclusively intended to preserve products in good condition
during storage and transport;64

(b)

breaking-up or assembly of packages;

(c)

washing, cleaning, or operations to remove dust, oxide, oil, paint, or other
coverings from a product;

(d)

ironing or pressing of textiles or textile articles of Chapter 50 through 63
of the HS;

(e)

simple painting or polishing operations;

(f)

husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, or glazing of cereals or rice
of Chapter 10 that does not result in a change of chapter;

(g)

operations to colour or flavour sugar of heading 17.01 or 17.02; operations
to form sugar lumps of heading 17.01; partial or total grinding of crystal
sugar of heading 17.01;

(h)

peeling, stoning, or shelling of vegetables of Chapter 7, fruits of Chapter 8,
nuts of heading 08.01 or 08.02 or groundnuts of heading 12.02, if these
vegetables, fruits, nuts, or groundnuts remain classified within the same
chapter;

(i)

sharpening, simple grinding, or simple cutting;

(j)

simple sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, or matching;

(k)

simple packaging operations, such as placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags,
cases, boxes, or fixing on cards or boards;

(l)

affixing or printing marks, labels, logos, and other like distinguishing signs
on the products or their packaging;

(m) mixing of sugar of heading 17.01 or 17.02 with any material;
(n)

64

simple mixing of materials, whether or not of different kinds; simple
mixing does not include an operation that causes a chemical reaction as
defined in the notes to Chapter 28 or 29 of Annex 5;

Preserving operations such as chilling, freezing, or ventilating are considered insufficient within
the meaning of subparagraph (a), whereas operations such as pickling, drying, or smoking that are
intended to give a product special or different characteristics are not considered insufficient.

555

(o)

simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article of
Chapter 61, 62, or 82 through 97 of the HS or disassembly of complete
articles of Chapter 61, 62, or 82 through 97 into parts;

(p)

a combination of two or more operations specified in subparagraphs (a) to
(o); and

(q)

slaughter of animals.

2.

In accordance with Article 3, all production carried out in the European Union
and in Canada on a product is considered when determining whether the
production undertaken on that product is insufficient within the meaning of
paragraph 1.

3.

For the purpose of paragraph 1, an operation shall be considered simple when
neither special skills, nor machines, apparatus, or tools especially produced or
installed for those operations are required for their performance or when those
skills, machines, apparatus, or tools do not contribute to the product’s essential
characteristics or properties.
Article 8
Unit of classification

For the purpose of this Protocol:
(a)

the tariff classification of a particular product or material shall be determined
according to the HS;

(b)

when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles or components is
classified pursuant to the terms of the HS under a single heading or subheading,
the whole shall constitute the particular product; and

(c)

when a shipment consists of a number of identical products classified under the
same heading or subheading of the HS, each product shall be considered
separately.
Article 9
Packaging and packing materials and containers

1.

If, under General Rule 5 of the HS, packaging is included with the product for
classification purposes, it is considered in determining whether all the nonoriginating materials used in the production of the product satisfy the
requirements set out in Annex 5.

2.

Packing materials and containers in which a product is packed for shipment shall
be disregarded in determining the origin of that product.

556

Article 10
Accounting segregation of fungible materials or products
1.

2.

(a)

If originating and non-originating fungible materials are used in the
production of a product, the determination of the origin of the fungible
materials does not need to be made through physical separation and
identification of any specific fungible material, but may be determined on
the basis of an inventory management system; or

(b)

if originating and non-originating fungible products of Chapter 10, 15, 27,
28, 29, heading 32.01 through 32.07, or heading 39.01 through 39.14 of
the HS are physically combined or mixed in inventory in a Party before
exportation to the other Party, the determination of the origin of the
fungible products does not need to be made through physical separation
and identification of any specific fungible product, but may be determined
on the basis of an inventory management system.

The inventory management system must:
(a)

ensure that, at any time, no more products receive originating status than
would have been the case if the fungible materials or fungible products
had been physically segregated;

(b)

specify the quantity of originating and non-originating materials or
products, including the dates on which those materials or products were
placed in inventory and, if required by the applicable rule of origin, the
value of those materials or products;

(c)

specify the quantity of products produced using fungible materials, or the
quantity of fungible products, that are supplied to customers who require
evidence of origin in a Party for the purpose of obtaining preferential
treatment under this Agreement, as well as to customers who do not
require such evidence; and

(d)

indicate whether an inventory of originating products was available in
sufficient quantity to support the declaration of originating status.

3.

A Party may require that an exporter or producer within its territory that is
seeking to use an inventory management system pursuant to this Article obtain
prior authorisation from that Party in order to use that system. The Party may
withdraw authorisation to use an inventory management system if the exporter
or producer makes improper use of it.

4.

For the purpose of paragraph 1, “fungible materials” or “fungible products”
means materials or products that are of the same kind and commercial quality,
with the same technical and physical characteristics, and which cannot be
distinguished from one another for origin purposes.

557

Article 11
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Accessories, spare parts, and tools delivered with a product that form part of its standard
accessories, spare parts, or tools, that are not invoiced separately from the product and
which quantities and value are customary for the product, shall be:
(a)

taken into account in calculating the value of the relevant non-originating
materials when the rule of origin of Annex 5 applicable to the product contains a
percentage for the maximum value of non-originating materials; and

(b)

disregarded in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the
production of the product undergo the applicable change in tariff classification
or other requirements set out in Annex 5.
Article 12
Sets

1.

Except as provided in Annex 5, a set, as referred to in General Rule 3 of the HS,
is originating provided that:
(a)

all of the set’s component products are originating; or

(b)

when the set contains a non-originating component product, at least one of
the component products or all of the packaging material and containers for
the set is originating; and
(i)

the value of the non-originating component products of Chapter 1
through 24 of the Harmonized System does not exceed 15 per cent of
the transaction value or ex-works price of the set;

(ii)

the value of the non-originating component products of Chapter 25
through 97 of the HS does not exceed 25 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the set; and

(iii) the value of all of the set’s non-originating component products does
not exceed 25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the set.
2.

The value of non-originating component products is calculated in the same
manner as the value of non-originating materials.

3.

The transaction value or ex-works price of the set shall be calculated in the same
manner as the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
Article 13
Neutral elements

558

For the purpose of determining whether a product is originating, it is not necessary to
determine the origin of the following which might be used in its production:
(a)

energy and fuel;

(b)

plant and equipment;

(c)

machines and tools; or

(d)

materials which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final
composition of the product.
Article 14
Transport through a third country

1.

2.

A product that has undergone production that satisfies the requirements of
Article 2 shall be considered originating only if, subsequent to that production,
the product:
(a)

does not undergo further production or any other operation outside the
territories of the Parties, other than unloading, reloading, or any other
operation necessary to preserve it in good condition, to transport the
product to the territory of a Party; and

(b)

remains under customs control while outside the territories of the Parties.

The storage of products and shipments or the splitting of shipments may take
place where carried out under the responsibility of the exporter or of a
subsequent holder of the products and the products remain under customs
control in the country or countries of transit.
Article 15
Returned originating products

If an originating product exported from a Party to a third country returns, it shall be
considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
customs authorities that the returning product:
(a)

is the same as that exported; and

(b)

has not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve it in good
condition.
Article 16
Sugar

1.

If a rule of origin requires that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production not exceed a specified threshold, the product satisfies this condition
559

if the total net weight of all mono-saccharides and di-saccharides contained in
the product, or in the materials used in production, does not exceed this
threshold.
2.

The product also satisfies the condition in paragraph 1 if the threshold is not
exceeded by the net weight of non-originating sugar classified in heading 17.01
or subheading 1702.30 through 1702.60 or 1702.90 other than malto-dextrin,
chemically pure maltose, or “colouring” caramel, as described in the explanatory
notes to heading 17.02, when used as such in the production of:
(a)

the product; and

(b)

the non-originating sugar-containing materials classified in subheading
1302.20, 1704.90, 1806.10, 1806.20, 1901.90, 2101.12, 2101.20, 2106.90,
and 3302.10 that are used as such in the production of the product.
Alternatively, the net weight of all mono-saccharides and di-saccharides
contained in any of these sugar-containing materials may also be used. If
the net weight of the non-originating sugar used in the production of these
sugar containing or the net weight of mono-saccharides and di-saccharides
contained in these sugar-containing materials is not known, the total net
weight of these materials used as such in production must apply.

3.

The net weight of any non-originating sugar as referred to in paragraph 2 may be
calculated on a dry weight basis.

4.

For the purpose of the rules of origin for heading 17.04 and 18.06, the value of
non-originating sugar refers to the value of the non-originating material referred
to in paragraph 2 that is used in production of the product.
Article 17
Net cost

1.

For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions apply, in addition to
those set out in Article 1:
motor vehicle means a product of subheading 8703.21 through 8703.90;
net cost means total cost minus sales promotion, marketing and after-sales
service costs, royalty, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable interest
cost that are included in the total cost;
non-allowable interest cost means interest costs incurred by a producer that
exceed 700 basis points above the applicable national government interest rate
identified for comparable maturities;
royalty means payments of any kind, including payments under technical
assistance or similar agreements, made as consideration for the use or right to
use any copyright, literary, artistic, or scientific work, patent, trademark, design,

560

model, plan, secret formula or process, excluding those payments under
technical assistance or similar agreements that can be related to specific services
such as:
(a)

personnel training, without regard to where it is performed; and

(b)

if performed in the territory of one or both of the Parties, engineering,
tooling, die-setting, software design and similar computer services, or
other services;

sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service costs means the following
costs related to sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service:
(a)

sales and marketing promotion; media advertising; advertising and market
research; promotional and demonstration materials; exhibits; sales
conferences, trade shows and conventions; banners; marketing displays;
free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service literature (product
brochures, catalogues, technical literature, price lists, service manuals and
sales aid information); establishment and protection of logos and
trademarks; sponsorships; wholesale and retail restocking charges;
entertainment;

(b)

sales and marketing incentives; consumer, retailer or wholesaler rebates;
merchandise incentives;

(c)

salaries and wages; sales commissions; bonuses; benefits (for example,
medical, insurance, and pension); travelling and living expenses; and
membership and professional fees for sales promotion, marketing, and
after-sales service personnel;

(d)

recruiting and training of sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales
service personnel, and after-sales training of customers' employees, if
those costs are identified separately for sales promotion, marketing, and
after-sales service of products on the financial statements or cost accounts
of the producer;

(e)

product liability insurance;

(f)

office supplies for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of
products, if those costs are identified separately for sales promotion,
marketing, and after-sales service of products on the financial statements
or cost accounts of the producer;

(g)

telephone, mail, and other communications, if those costs are identified
separately for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of
products on the financial statements or cost accounts of the producer;

(h)

rent and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service
offices and distribution centres;

561

(i)

property insurance premiums, taxes, cost of utilities, and repair and
maintenance of sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service offices
and distribution centres, where such costs are identified separately for
sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales service of products on the
financial statements or cost accounts of the producer; and

(j)

payments by the producer to other persons for warranty repairs;

shipping and packing costs means the costs incurred in packing a product for
shipment and shipping the product from the point of direct shipment to the
buyer, excluding costs of preparing and packaging the product for retail sale; and
total cost means all product costs, period costs and other costs incurred in
relation to the production of a product in Canada when:

2.

3.

(a)

product costs means those costs that are associated with the production of
a product and include the value of materials, direct labour costs, and direct
overhead.

(b)

period costs means those costs other than product costs that are expensed
in the period in which they are incurred, including selling expenses and
general and administrative expenses.

(c)

other costs means all costs recorded on the books of the producer that are
not product costs or period costs.

For the purpose of calculating the net cost of a product under Table D.1 (Annual
Quota Allocation for Vehicles Exported from Canada to the European Union) in
Annex 5-A , the producer of the product may:
(a)

calculate the total cost incurred with respect to all products produced by
that producer, subtract any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales
service costs, royalty, shipping and packing costs, and non-allowable
interest cost that is included in the total cost of all those products, and then
reasonably allocate the resulting net cost of those products to the product;

(b)

calculate the total cost incurred with respect to all products produced by
that producer, reasonably allocate the total cost to the product, and then
subtract any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs,
royalty, shipping and packing costs and non-allowable interest cost that is
included in the portion of the total cost allocated to the product; or

(c)

reasonably allocate each cost that forms part of the total cost incurred by
that producer with respect to the product so that the aggregate of these
costs does not include any sales promotion, marketing and after-sales
service costs, royalty, shipping and packing costs, or non-allowable
interest cost.

For the purpose of calculating the net cost of a product under paragraph 1, the
producer may average its calculation over its fiscal year using any one of the
562

following categories, on the basis of either all motor vehicles produced by that
producer in the category or only those motor vehicles in the category that are
produced by that producer and exported to the territory of the other Party:
(a)

the same model line of motor vehicles in the same class of vehicles
produced in the same plant in the territory of a Party;

(b)

the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the same plant in the
territory of a Party;

(c)

the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party;

(d)

the same class of motor vehicles produced in the same plant in the territory
of a Party; or

(e)

any other category as the Parties may decide.
SECTION C
ORIGIN PROCEDURES
Article 18
Proof of origin

1.

Products originating in the European Union, on importation into Canada, and
products originating in Canada, on importation into the European Union, benefit
from preferential tariff treatment of this Agreement on the basis of a declaration
(“origin declaration”).

2.

The origin declaration is provided on an invoice or any other commercial
document that describes the originating product in sufficient detail to enable its
identification.

3.

The different linguistic versions of the text of the origin declaration are set out in
Annex 2.
Article 19
Obligations regarding exportations

1.

2.

An origin declaration as referred to in Article 18.1 shall be completed:
(a)

in the European Union, by an exporter in accordance with the relevant
European Union legislation; and

(b)

in Canada, by an exporter in accordance with Part V of the Customs Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.).

The exporter completing an origin declaration shall at the request of the customs
authority of the Party of export submit a copy of the origin declaration and all
appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned,
563

including supporting documents or written statements from the producers or
suppliers, and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
3.

An origin declaration shall be completed and signed by the exporter unless
otherwise provided.

4.

A Party may allow an origin declaration to be completed by the exporter when
the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation if the origin
declaration is presented in the importing Party within two years after the
importation of the products to which it relates or within a longer period of time
if specified in the laws of the importing Party.

5.

The customs authority of the Party of import may allow the application of an
origin declaration to multiple shipments of identical originating products that
take place within a period of time that does not exceed 12 months as set out by
the exporter in that declaration.

6.

An exporter that has completed an origin declaration and becomes aware or has
reason to believe that the origin declaration contains incorrect information shall
immediately notify the importer in writing of any change affecting the
originating status of each product to which the origin declaration applies.

7.

The Parties may allow the establishment of a system that permits an origin
declaration to be submitted electronically and directly from the exporter in the
territory of a Party to an importer in the territory of the other Party, including the
replacement of the exporter's signature on the origin declaration with an
electronic signature or identification code.
Article 20
Validity of the origin declaration

1.

An origin declaration shall be valid for 12 months from the date it was
completed by the exporter, or for such longer period of time as provided by the
Party of import. The preferential tariff treatment may be claimed, within this
validity period, to the customs authority of the Party of import.

2.

The Party of import may accept an origin declaration submitted to its customs
authority after the validity period referred to in paragraph 1 for the purpose of
preferential tariff treatment in accordance with that Party’s laws.
Article 21
Obligations regarding importations

1.

For the purpose of claiming preferential tariff treatment, the importer shall:

564

(a)

submit the origin declaration to the customs authority of the Party of
import as required by and in accordance with the procedures applicable in
that Party;

(b)

if required by the customs authority of the Party of import, submit a
translation of the origin declaration; and

(c)

if required by the customs authority of the Party of import, provide for a
statement accompanying or forming a part of the import declaration, to the
effect that the products meet the conditions required for the application of
this Agreement.

2.

An importer that becomes aware or has reason to believe that an origin
declaration for a product to which preferential tariff treatment has been granted
contains incorrect information shall immediately notify the customs authority of
the Party of import in writing of any change affecting the originating status of
that product and pay any duties owing.

3.

When an importer claims preferential tariff treatment for a good imported from
the territory of the other Party, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff
treatment to the good if the importer fails to comply with any requirement under
this Protocol.

4.

A Party shall, in conformity with its laws, provide that, if a product would have
qualified as an originating product when it was imported into the territory of that
Party but the importer did not have an origin declaration at the time of
importation, the importer of the product may, within a period of time of no less
than three years after the date of importation, apply for a refund of duties paid as
a result of the product not having been accorded preferential tariff treatment.
Article 22
Proof related to transport through a third country

Each Party, through its customs authority, may require an importer to demonstrate that a
product for which the importer claims preferential tariff treatment was shipped in
accordance with Article 14 by providing:
(a)

carrier documents, including bills of lading or waybills, indicating the shipping
route and all points of shipment and transhipment prior to the importation of the
product; and

(b)

when the product is shipped through or transhipped outside the territories of the
Parties, a copy of the customs control documents indicating to that customs
authority that the product remained under customs control while outside the
territories of the Parties.

565

Article 23
Importation by instalments
Each Party shall provide that if dismantled or non-assembled products within the
meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the HS falling within Sections XVI and XVII or heading
7308 and 9406 of the HS are imported by instalments at the request of the importer and
on the conditions set out by the customs authority of the Party of import, a single origin
declaration for these products shall be submitted, as required, to that customs authority
upon importation of the first instalment.
Article 24
Exemptions from origin declarations
1.

A Party may, in conformity with its laws, waive the requirement to present an
origin declaration as referred to in Article 21, for low value shipments of
originating products from another Party and for originating products forming
part of the personal luggage of a traveller coming from another Party.

2.

A Party may exclude any importation from the provisions of paragraph 1 when
the importation is part of a series of importations that may reasonably be
considered to have been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the
requirements of this Protocol related to origin declarations.

3.

The Parties may set value limits for products referred to in paragraph 1, and
shall exchange information regarding those limits.
Article 25
Supporting documents

The documents referred to in Article 19.2, may include documents relating to the
following:
(a)

the production processes carried out on the originating product or on materials
used in the production of that product;

(b)

the purchase of, the cost of, the value of, and the payment for the product;

(c)

the origin of, the purchase of, the cost of, the value of, and the payment for all
materials, including neutral elements, used in the production of the product; and

(d)

the shipment of the product.

566

Article 26
Preservation of records
1.

An exporter that has completed an origin declaration shall keep a copy of the
origin declaration, as well as the supporting documents referred to in Article 25,
for three years after the completion of the origin declaration or for a longer
period of time as the Party of export may specify.

2.

If an exporter has based an origin declaration on a written statement from the
producer, the producer shall be required to maintain records in accordance with
paragraph 1.

3.

When provided for in laws of the Party of import, an importer that has been
granted preferential tariff treatment shall keep documentation relating to the
importation of the product, including a copy of the origin declaration, for three
years after the date on which preferential treatment was granted, or for a longer
period of time as that Party may specify.

4.

Each Party shall permit, in accordance with that Party’s laws, importers,
exporters, and producers in its territory to maintain documentation or records in
any medium, provided that the documentation or records can be retrieved and
printed.

5.

A Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to a product that is the subject of
an origin verification when the importer, exporter, or producer of the product
that is required to maintain records or documentation under this Article:
(a)

fails to maintain records or documentation relevant to determining the
origin of the product in accordance with the requirements of this Protocol;
or

(b)

denies access to those records or documentation.
Article 27
Discrepancies and formal errors

1.

The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the origin
declaration and those made in the documents submitted to the customs
authorities for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the
products shall not, because of that fact, render the origin declaration null and
void if it is established that this document corresponds to the products submitted.

2.

Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on an origin declaration shall not
cause this document to be rejected if these errors do not create doubts
concerning the correctness of the statements made in the document.

567

Article 28
Cooperation
1.

The Parties shall cooperate in the uniform administration and interpretation of
this Protocol and, through their customs authorities, assist each other in
verifying the originating status of the products on which an origin declaration is
based.

2.

For the purpose of facilitating the verifications or assistance referred to in
paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the Parties shall provide each other,
through the European Commission, with addresses of the responsible customs
authorities.

3.

It is understood that the customs authority of the Party of export assumes all
expenses in carrying out paragraph 1.

4.

It is further understood that the customs authorities of the Parties will discuss the
overall operation and administration of the verification process, including
forecasting of workload and discussing priorities. If there is an unusual increase
in the number of requests, the customs authorities of the Parties will consult to
establish priorities and consider steps to manage the workload, taking into
consideration operational requirements.

5.

With respect to products considered originating in accordance with Article 3, the
Parties may cooperate with a third country to develop customs procedures based
on the principles of this Protocol.
Article 29
Origin verification

1.

For the purpose of ensuring the proper application of this Protocol, the Parties
shall assist each other, through their customs authorities, in verifying whether
products are originating and ensuring the accuracy of claims for preferential
tariff treatment.

2.

A Party’s request for an origin verification concerning whether a product is
originating or whether all other requirements of this Protocol are fulfilled shall
be:
(a)

based on risk assessment methods applied by the customs authority of the
Party of import, which may include random selection; or

(b)

made when the Party of import has reasonable doubts about whether the
product is originating or whether all other requirements of this Protocol
have been fulfilled.

568

3.

The customs authority of the Party of import may verify whether a product is
originating by requesting, in writing, that the customs authority of the Party of
export conduct a verification concerning whether a product is originating. When
requesting a verification, the customs authority of the Party of import shall
provide the customs authority of the Party of export with:
(a)

the identity of the customs authority issuing the request;

(b)

the name of the exporter or producer to be verified;

(c)

the subject and scope of the verification; and

(d)

a copy of the origin declaration and, where applicable, any other relevant
documentation.

4.

When appropriate, the customs authority of the Party of import may request,
pursuant to paragraph 3, specific documentation and information from the
customs authority of the Party of export.

5.

A request made by the customs authority of the Party of import pursuant to
paragraph 3 shall be provided to the customs authority of the Party of export by
certified or registered mail or any other method that produces a confirmation of
receipt by that customs authority.

6.

The customs authority of the Party of export shall proceed to the origin
verification. For this purpose, the customs authority may, in accordance with its
laws, request documentation, call for any evidence, or visit the premises of an
exporter or a producer to review the records referred to in Article 25 and observe
the facilities used in the production of the product.

7.

If an exporter has based an origin declaration on a written statement from the
producer or supplier, the exporter may arrange for the producer or supplier to
provide documentation or information directly to the customs authority of the
Party of export upon that Party’s request.

8.

As soon as possible and in any event within 12 months after receiving the
request referred to in paragraph 4, the customs authority of the Party of export
shall complete a verification of whether the product is originating and fulfils the
other requirements of this Protocol, and shall:
(a)

provide to the customs authority of the Party of import, by certified or
registered mail or any other method that produces a confirmation of receipt
by that customs authority, a written report in order for it to determine
whether the product is originating or not, and that contains:
(i)

the results of the verification;

(ii)

the description of the product subject to verification and the tariff
classification relevant to the application of the rule of origin;

569

(iii) a description and explanation of the production sufficient to support
the rationale concerning the originating status of the product;
(iv) information on the manner in which the verification was conducted;
and
(v)
(b)

where appropriate, supporting documentation; and

subject to its laws, notify the exporter of its decision concerning whether
the product is originating.

9.

The period of time referred to in paragraph 8 may be extended by mutual
consent of the customs authorities concerned.

10.

Pending the results of an origin verification conducted pursuant to paragraph 8,
or consultations under paragraph 13, the customs authority of the Party of
import, subject to any precautionary measures it deems necessary, shall offer to
release the product to the importer.

11.

If the result of an origin verification has not been provided in accordance with
paragraph 8, the customs authority of the importing Party may deny preferential
tariff treatment to a product if it has reasonable doubt or when it is unable to
determine whether the product is originating.

12.

If there are differences in relation to the verification procedures of this Article or
in the interpretation of the rules of origin in determining whether a product
qualifies as originating, and these differences cannot be resolved through
consultations between the customs authority requesting the verification and the
customs authority responsible for performing the verification, and if the customs
authority of the importing Party intends to make a determination of origin that is
inconsistent with the written report provided under paragraph 8(a) by the
customs authority of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall notify the
exporting Party within 60 days of receiving the written report.

13.

At the request of either Party, the Parties shall hold and conclude consultations
within 90 days from the date of the notification referred to in paragraph 12 to
resolve those differences. The period of time for concluding consultations may
be extended on a case by case basis by mutual written consent between the
Parties. The customs authority of the importing Party may make its
determination of origin after the conclusion of these consultations. The Parties
may also seek to resolve those differences within the Joint Customs Cooperation
Committee referred to in Article 34.

14.

In all cases, the settlement of differences between the importer and the customs
authority of the Party of import shall be under the law of the Party of import.

15.

This Protocol does not prevent a customs authority of a Party from issuing a
determination of origin or an advance ruling relating to any matter under
consideration by the Joint Customs Cooperation Committee or the Committee on
570

Trade in Goods established under Article 26.2(a) (Committees) or from taking
any other action that it considers necessary, pending a resolution of the matter
under this Agreement.
Article 30
Review and appeal
1.

2.

Each Party shall grant substantially the same rights of review and appeal of
determinations of origin and advance rulings issued by its customs authority as it
provides to importers in its territory, to any person who:
(a)

has received a determination on origin in the application of this Protocol;
or

(b)

has received an advance ruling pursuant to Article 33.1.

Further to Articles 27.4 (Administrative proceedings) and 27.5 (Review and
appeal), each Party shall provide that the rights of review and appeal referred to
in paragraph 1 include access to at least two levels of appeal or review including
at least one judicial or quasi-judicial level.
Article 31
Penalties

Each Party shall maintain measures imposing criminal, civil or administrative penalties
for violations of its laws relating to this Protocol.
Article 32
Confidentiality
1.

This Protocol does not require a Party to furnish or allow access to business
information or to information relating to an identified or identifiable natural
person, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or would be
contrary to that Party’s law protecting business information and personal data
and privacy.

2.

Each Party shall maintain, in conformity with its law, the confidentiality of the
information collected pursuant to this Protocol and shall protect that information
from disclosure that could prejudice the competitive position of the person
providing the information. If the Party receiving or obtaining the information is
required by its laws to disclose the information, that Party shall notify the person
or Party who provided that information.

3.

Each Party shall ensure that the confidential information collected pursuant to
this Protocol shall not be used for purposes other than the administration and

571

enforcement of determination of origin and of customs matters, except with the
permission of the person or Party who provided the confidential information.
4.

Notwithstanding paragraph 3, a Party may allow information collected pursuant
to this Protocol to be used in any administrative, judicial, or quasi-judicial
proceedings instituted for failure to comply with customs related laws
implementing this Protocol. A Party shall notify the person or Party who
provided the information in advance of such use.

5.

The Parties shall exchange information on their respective law concerning data
protection for the purpose of facilitating the operation and application of
paragraph 2.
Article 33
Advance rulings relating to origin

1.

Each Party shall, through its customs authority, provide for the expeditious
issuance of written advance rulings in accordance with its law, prior to the
importation of a product into its territory, concerning whether a product qualifies
as an originating product under this Protocol.

2.

Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance
rulings, including a detailed description of the information reasonably required
to process an application for a ruling.

3.

Each Party shall provide that its customs authority:

4.

(a)

may, at any time during the course of an evaluation of an application for
an advance ruling, request supplemental information from the person
requesting the ruling;

(b)

issue the ruling within 120 days from the date on which it has obtained all
necessary information from the person requesting the advance ruling; and

(c)

provide, to the person requesting the advance ruling, a full explanation of
the reasons for the ruling.

When an application for an advance ruling involves an issue that is the subject
of:
(a)

a verification of origin;

(b

a review by, or appeal to, a customs authority; or

(c)

a judicial or quasi-judicial review in the customs authority’s territory;

the customs authority, in accordance with its laws, may decline or postpone the
issuance of the ruling.

572

5.

Subject to paragraph 7, each Party shall apply an advance ruling to importations
into its territory of the product for which the ruling was requested on the date of
its issuance or at a later date if specified in the ruling.

6.

Each Party shall provide, to any person requesting an advance ruling, the same
treatment as it provided to any other person to whom it issued an advance ruling,
provided that the facts and circumstances are identical in all material respects.

7.

The Party issuing an advance ruling may modify or revoke an advance ruling:
(a)

if the ruling is based on an error of fact;

(b)

if there is a change in the material facts or circumstances on which the
ruling is based;

(c)

to conform with an amendment of Chapter Two (National Treatment and
Market Access for Goods), or this Protocol; or

(d)

to conform with a judicial decision or a change in its law.

8.

Each Party shall provide that a modification or revocation of an advance ruling
is effective on the date on which the modification or revocation is issued, or on a
later date if specified in the ruling, and shall not be applied to importations of a
product that have occurred prior to that date, unless the person to whom the
advance ruling was issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and
conditions.

9.

Notwithstanding paragraph 8, the Party issuing the advance ruling may, in
conformity with its law, postpone the effective date of a modification or
revocation for no more than six months.

10.

Subject to paragraph 7, each Party shall provide that an advance ruling remains
in effect and is honoured.
Article 34
Committee

The Joint Customs Cooperation Committee (“JCCC”), granted authority to act under the
auspices of the CETA Joint Committee as a specialised committee pursuant to Article
26.2.1 (Committees) may review this Protocol and recommend amendments to its
provisions to the CETA Joint Committee. The JCCC shall endeavour to decide upon:
(a)

the uniform administration of the rules of origin, including tariff classification
and valuation matters relating to this Protocol;

(b)

technical, interpretative, or administrative matters relating to this Protocol; or

(c)

the priorities in relation to origin verifications and other matters arising from
origin verifications.

573

ANNEX 1
TOLERANCE FOR TEXTILE AND APPAREL PRODUCTS
1.

For the purpose of this Annex, the following definitions apply:
natural fibres means fibres other than artificial or synthetic fibres that have not
been spun. Natural fibres include waste, and, unless otherwise specified, include
fibres which have been carded, combed or otherwise processed, but not spun.
Natural fibres include horsehair of heading 05.11, silk of heading 50.02 through
50.03, wool-fibres and fine or coarse animal hair of heading 51.01 through
51.05, cotton fibres of heading 52.01 through 52.03, and other vegetable fibres
of heading 53.01 through 53.05;
textile pulp, chemical materials, and paper-making materials means
materials, not classified in Chapter 50 through 63, which can be used to
manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns; and
man-made staple fibres means synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres
or waste, of heading 55.01 through 55.07.

2.

For greater certainty, non-originating materials of Chapter 1 through 49 or 64
through 97, including materials that contain textiles, may be disregarded for the
purpose of determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the
production of a product of Chapter 50 through 63 satisfies the applicable rule of
origin set out in Annex 5.

3.

Subject to paragraph 7, if the non-originating materials used in the production of
a product of Chapter 50 through 63 do not fulfil the conditions set out in Annex
5, the product is nonetheless an originating product provided that:

4.

(a)

the product is produced using two or more of the basic textile materials
listed in Table 1;

(b)

the net weight of non-originating basic textile materials listed in Table 1
does not exceed 10 per cent of the net weight of the product; and

(c)

the product satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Protocol.

Subject to paragraph 7, in the case of a product of Chapter 50 through 63
produced using one or more basic textile materials listed in Table 1, and nonoriginating yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of
polyether, the product is nonetheless an originating product provided that:
(a)

the weight of the non-originating yarn made of polyurethane segmented
with flexible segments of polyether does not exceed 20 per cent of the
weight of the product; and

(b)

the product satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Protocol.

574

5.

6.

Subject to paragraph 7, in the case of a product of Chapter 50 through 63
produced using one or more basic textile materials listed in Table 1 and nonoriginating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic
film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5
mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two
layers of plastic film, the product is nonetheless an originating product provided
that:
(a)

the weight of the non-originating strip consisting of a core of aluminium
foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium
powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a
transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film does
not exceed 30 per cent of the weight of the product; and

(b)

the product satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Protocol.

Subject to paragraph 7, if the non-originating materials used in the production of
a product of Chapter 61 through 63 do not fulfil the conditions set out in Annex
5, the product is nonetheless an originating product provided that:
(a)

the non-originating materials are classified in a heading other than that of
the product;

(b)

the value of the non-originating materials does not exceed 8 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product; and

(c)

the product satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Protocol.

This paragraph does not apply to non-originating materials used in the
production of linings or interlinings of a product of Chapter 61 through 63.
7.

The tolerance provided for in paragraphs 2 through 6 does not apply to nonoriginating materials used in the production of a product if those materials are
subject to a rule of origin that includes a percentage for their maximum value or
weight.

Table 1 – Basic textile materials
1. silk
2. wool
3. coarse animal hair
4. fine animal hair
5. horsehair
6. cotton
7. paper-making materials and paper

575

8. flax
9. true hemp
10. jute and other textile bast fibres
11. sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave
12. coconut, abaca, ramie, and other vegetable textile fibres
13. synthetic man-made filaments
14. artificial man-made filaments
15. current-conducting filaments
16. synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene
17. synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester
18. synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide
19. synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile
20. synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide
21. synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetraflouroethylene
22. synthetic man-made staple fibres of poly(phenylene sulphide)
23. synthetic man-made staple fibres of poly(vinyl chloride)
24. other synthetic man-made staple fibres
25. artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose
26. other artificial man-made staple fibres
27. yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether, whether
or not gimped
28. yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester, whether
or not gimped
29. a material of heading 56.05 (metallised yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core
of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium
powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or
coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film
30. any other material of heading 56.05

576

ANNEX 2
TEXT OF THE ORIGIN DECLARATION
The origin declaration, the text of which is given below, must be completed in accordance with
the footnotes. However, the footnotes do not have to be reproduced.
(Period: from___________ to __________(1)
The exporter of the products covered by this document (customs authorisation No ...(2) declares
that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of ...(3) preferential origin.
…………………………………………………………….............................................(4)
(Place and date)

...……………………………………………………………………..............................(5)
(Signature and printed name of the exporter)

___________________
(1)

When the origin declaration is completed for multiple shipments of identical originating products within the meaning of Article
19.5, indicate the period of time for which the origin declaration will apply. The period of time must not exceed 12 months. All
importations of the product must occur within the period indicated. Where a period of time is not applicable, the field can be left
blank.

(2)

For EU exporters: When the origin declaration is completed by an approved or registered exporter the exporter’s customs
authorisation or registration number must be included. A customs authorisation number is required only if the exporter is an
approved exporter. When the origin declaration is not completed by an approved or registered exporter, the words in brackets must
be omitted or the space left blank.
For Canadian exporters: The exporter’s Business Number assigned by the Government of Canada must be included. Where the
exporter has not been assigned a business number, the field may be left blank.

(3)

“Canada/EU” means products qualifying as originating under the rules of origin of the Canada-European Union Comprehensive
Economic and Trade Agreement. When the origin declaration relates, in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and
Melilla, the exporter must clearly indicate the symbol “CM”.

(4)

These indications may be omitted if the information is contained on the document itself.

(5)

Article 19.3 provides an exception to the requirement of the exporter’s signature. Where the exporter is not required to sign, the
exemption of signature also implies the exemption of the name of the signatory.

577

Bulgarian version
(Период: от _______до_________(1))
Износителят на продуктите, обхванати от този документ (митническо разрешение № …
(2)
), декларира, че освен когато е отбелязано друго, тези продукти са с/със …
преференциален произход (3).
Spanish version
(Período comprendido entre el _______y el_________(1))
El exportador de los productos incluidos en el presente documento (autorización aduanera
nº …(2)) declara que, salvo indicación en sentido contrario, estos productos gozan de un origen
preferencial. …(3).
Czech version
(Období: od _______do_________(1))
Vývozce výrobků uvedených v tomto dokumentu (číslo povolení … (2)) prohlašuje, že kromě
zřetelně označených, mají tyto výrobky preferenční původ v …(3)..
Danish version
(Periode: fra _______til_________(1))
Eksportøren af varer, der er omfattet af nærværende dokument, (toldmyndighedernes tilladelse
nr. ...(2)), erklærer, at varerne, medmindre andet tydeligt er angivet, har præferenceoprindelse i
...(3).
German version
(Zeitraum: von _______ bis _________(1))
Der Ausführer (ermächtigter Ausführer; Bewilligungs-Nr. ...(2)) der Waren, auf die sich dieses
Handelspapier bezieht, erklärt, dass diese Waren, soweit nicht anderes angegeben,
präferenzbegünstigte ...(3) Ursprungswaren sind.
Estonian version
(Ajavahemik: alates _______ kuni _________(1))
Käesoleva dokumendiga hõlmatud toodete eksportija (tolliameti kinnitus nr. ...(2)) deklareerib, et
need tooted on ...(3) sooduspäritoluga, välja arvatud juhul, kui on selgelt näidatud teisiti.
Greek version
(Περίοδος: από _______έως_________(1))
Ο εξαγωγέας των προϊόντων που καλύπτονται από το παρόν έγγραφο (άδεια τελωνείου υπ' αριθ.
...(2)) δηλώνει ότι, εκτός εάν δηλώνεται σαφώς άλλως, τα προϊόντα αυτά είναι προτιμησιακής
καταγωγής ...(3).
578

English version
(Period: from _______to_________(1))
The exporter of the products covered by this document (customs authorisation No…(2)) declares
that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of …(3) preferential origin.
French version
(Période: du _______au_________(1))
L'exportateur des produits couverts par le présent document (autorisation douanière n° ... (2))
déclare que, sauf indication claire du contraire, ces produits ont l'origine préférentielle ... (3)).
Croatian version
(Razdoblje: od _______do_________(1))
Izvoznik proizvoda obuhvaćenih ovom ispravom (carinsko ovlaštenje br. ... (2)) izjavljuje da su,
osim ako je drukčije izričito navedeno, ovi proizvodi ... (3) preferencijalnog podrijetla.
Italian version
(Periodo: dal _______al_________(1))
L'esportatore delle merci contemplate nel presente documento (autorizzazione doganale n. ...(2))
dichiara che, salvo indicazione contraria, le merci sono di origine preferenziale ...(3).
Latvian version
(Laikposms: no _______līdz_________(1))
Šajā dokumentā (muitas atļauja Nr. …(2)) norādīto produktu eksportētājs deklarē, ka šiem
produktiem ir …(3) preferenciāla izcelsme, ja vien nav skaidri minēts citādi.
Lithuanian version
(Laikotarpis: nuo _______iki_________(1))
Šiame dokumente išvardintų prekių eksportuotojas (muitinės liudijimo Nr. …(2)) deklaruoja, kad,
jeigu kitaip nenurodyta, tai yra …(3) preferencinės kilmės prekės..
Hungarian version
(Időszak: _______-tól_________-ig(1))
A jelen okmányban szereplő áruk exportőre (vámfelhatalmazási szám: …(2)) kijelentem, hogy
eltérő egyértelmű jelzés hiányában az áruk preferenciális …(3) származásúak.
Maltese version
(Perjodu: minn _______sa _________(1))

579

L-esportatur tal-prodotti koperti b’dan id-dokument (awtorizzazzjoni tad-dwana nru. …(2))
jiddikjara li, ħlief fejn indikat b’mod ċar li mhux hekk, dawn il-prodotti huma ta’ oriġini
preferenzjali …(3).
Dutch version
(Periode: van _______ tot en met _________(1))
De exporteur van de goederen waarop dit document van toepassing is (douanevergunning
nr. ...(2)), verklaart dat, behoudens uitdrukkelijke andersluidende vermelding, deze goederen van
preferentiële oorsprong zijn uit ...(3).
Polish version
(Okres: od _______do_________(1))
Eksporter produktów objętych tym dokumentem (upoważnienie władz celnych nr … (2))
deklaruje, że z wyjątkiem gdzie jest to wyraźnie określone, produkty te mają … (3) preferencyjne
pochodzenie.
Portuguese version
(Período: de _______a_________(1))
O abaixo assinado, exportador dos produtos cobertos pelo presente documento (autorização
aduaneira n.º ...(2)), declara que, salvo expressamente indicado em contrário, estes produtos são
de origem preferencial ...(3).
Romanian version
(Perioada: de la _______până la_________(1))
Exportatorul produselor care fac obiectul prezentului document (autorizația vamală nr. …(2))
declară că, exceptând cazul în care în mod expres este indicat altfel, aceste produse sunt de
origine preferențială …(3).
Slovenian version
(Obdobje: od _______do_________(1))
Izvoznik blaga, zajetega s tem dokumentom (pooblastilo carinskih organov št …(2)), izjavlja, da,
razen če ni drugače jasno navedeno, ima to blago …(3) preferencialno poreklo.
Slovak version
(Obdobie: od _______do_________(1))
Vývozca výrobkov uvedených v tomto dokumente (číslo colného povolenia …(2)) vyhlasuje, že
pokiaľ nie je jasne uvedené inak, majú tieto výrobky preferenčný pôvod v …(3).
Finnish version

580

( ______ ja ________välinen aika(1))
Tässä asiakirjassa mainittujen tuotteiden viejä (tullin lupa n:o ...(2)) ilmoittaa, että nämä tuotteet
ovat, ellei toisin ole selvästi merkitty, etuuskohteluun oikeutettuja ... alkuperätuotteita (3).
Swedish version
(Period: från _______till_________(1))
Exportören av de varor som omfattas av detta dokument (tullmyndighetens tillstånd nr ...(2))
försäkrar att dessa varor, om inte annat tydligt markerats, har förmånsberättigande ursprung i
...(3).

581

ANNEX 3
SUPPLIER’S STATEMENT FOR NON-ORIGINATING MATERIALS USED IN THE
PRODUCTION OF NON-ORIGINATING PRODUCTS
Statement:
I, the undersigned, supplier of the products covered by the annexed document, declare that:
(a)

The following materials which do not originate in the European Union/in Canada (1) have been used in the
European Union/in Canada to produce the following supplied non-originating products.

(b)

Any other materials used in the European Union/in Canada to produce these products originate there.

1

2

3

4

5

6

Description of
nonoriginating
product(s)
supplied

HS tariff
classification
of nonoriginating
product(s)
supplied

Value of nonoriginating
product(s)
supplied(2)

Description of
nonoriginating
material(s)
used

HS tariff
classification
of nonoriginating
material(s)
used

Value of nonoriginating
materials
used(2)

Total:

Total:

I undertake to make available any further supporting documents required.
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
(Place and Date)
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
(Name and position, name and address of company)
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
(Signature)
_______________
(1)

Strikethrough the Party not applicable, as the case may be

(2)

For each non-originating product supplied and non-originating material used, specify the value per unit of the products and materials
described in columns 3 and 6, respectively.

582

ANNEX 4
MATTERS APPLICABLE TO CEUTA AND MELILLA
1.

For the purpose of this Protocol, in the case of the European Union, the term “Party”
does not include Ceuta and Melilla.

2.

Products originating in Canada, when imported into Ceuta and Melilla, shall in all
respects be subject to the same customs regime, including preferential tariff
treatment, as that which is applied to products originating in the customs territory of
the European Union under Protocol 2 of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom of
Spain and the Portuguese Republic to the European Communities. Canada shall
apply to imports of products covered by this Agreement and originating in Ceuta and
Melilla the same customs regime, including preferential tariff treatment, as that
which is applied to products imported from and originating in the European Union.

3.

The rules of origin applicable to Canada under this Protocol shall apply in
determining the origin of products exported from Canada to Ceuta and Melilla. The
rules of origin applicable to the European Union under this Protocol shall apply in
determining the origin of products exported from Ceuta and Melilla to Canada.

4.

The provisions of this Protocol concerning the issuance, use and subsequent
verification of origin shall apply to products exported from Canada to Ceuta and
Melilla and to products exported from Ceuta and Melilla to Canada.

5.

The provisions on cumulation of origin of this Protocol shall apply to the import and
export of products between the European Union, Canada and Ceuta and Melilla.

6.

For the purposes mentioned in paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5, Ceuta and Melilla shall be
regarded as a single territory.

7.

The Spanish customs authorities shall be responsible for the application of this
Annex in Ceuta and Melilla.

583

ANNEX 5
PRODUCT-SPECIFIC RULES OF ORIGIN
Introductory Notes to Annex 5
1.

This Annex sets out the conditions required for a product to be considered originating
within the meaning of Article 5 (Sufficient Production).

2.

The following definitions apply:
chapter means a chapter of the Harmonized System;
heading means any four-digit number, or the first four digits of any number, used in
the Harmonized System;
section means a section of the Harmonized System; and
subheading means any six-digit number, or the first six digits of any number, used
in the Harmonized System.

3.

The product-specific rule of origin, or set of rules of origin, that applies to a product
classified in a particular heading, subheading, or group of headings or subheadings is
set out immediately adjacent to that heading, subheading, or group of headings or
subheadings.

4.

Unless otherwise specified, a requirement of a change in tariff classification or any
other condition set out in a product-specific rule of origin applies only to nonoriginating material.

5.

Section, chapter, heading, or subheading notes, where applicable, are found at the
beginning of each new section, chapter, heading, or subheading. These notes must be
read in conjunction with the product-specific rules of origin for the applicable
section, chapter, heading, or subheading and may impose further conditions on, or
provide an alternative to, the product-specific rules of origin.

6.

Unless otherwise specified, reference to weight in a product-specific rule of origin
means the net weight, which is the weight of a material or a product not including the
weight of packaging as set out in the definitions of “net weight of non-originating
material” and “net weight of the product” in Article 1 (Definitions) of this Protocol.

7.

A reference to non-originating sugar in a product-specific rule of origin means the
non-originating material referred to in Article 16 (Sugar) of this Protocol.

8.

If a product-specific rule of origin requires:

65

(a)

a change from any other chapter, heading, or subheading, or a change to
product x65 from any other chapter, heading, or subheading, only nonoriginating material classified in a chapter, heading, or subheading other than
that of the product may be used in the production of the product;

(b)

a change from within a heading or subheading, or from within any one of these
headings or subheadings, non-originating material classified within the heading
or subheading may be used in the production of the product, as well as non-

In these notes product x or tariff provision x denotes a specific product or tariff provision, and x per cent
denotes a specific percentage.

584

originating material classified in a chapter, heading, or subheading other than
that of the product;
(c)

a change from any heading or subheading outside a group, only non-originating
material classified outside the group of headings or subheadings may be used
in the production of the product;

(d)

that a product is wholly obtained, the product must be wholly obtained within
the meaning of Article 4 (Wholly Obtained Products). If a shipment consists of
a number of identical products classified under tariff provision x, each product
shall be considered separately;

(e)

production in which all the material of tariff provision x used is wholly
obtained, all of the material of tariff provision x used in production of the
product must be wholly obtained within the meaning of Article 4 (Wholly
Obtained Products);

(f)

a change from tariff provision x, whether or not there is also a change from any
other chapter, heading or subheading, the value of any non-originating material
that satisfies the change in tariff classification specified in the phrase
commencing with the words “whether or not” is not considered when
calculating the value of non-originating materials. If two or more productspecific rules of origin are applicable to a heading, subheading, or group of
headings or subheadings, the change in tariff classification specified in this
phrase reflects the change specified in the first rule of origin;

(g)

that the value of non-originating materials of tariff provision x does not exceed
x per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product, only the
value of the non-originating material specified in this rule of origin is
considered when calculating the value of non-originating materials. The
percentage for the maximum value of non-originating materials as set out in
this rule of origin may not be exceeded through the use of Article 6
(Tolerance);

(h)

that the value of non-originating materials classified in the same tariff
provision as the final product does not exceed x per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product, non-originating material classified in a
tariff provision other than that of the product may be used in the production of
the product. Only the value of the non-originating materials classified in the
same tariff provision as the final product is considered when calculating the
value of non-originating materials. The percentage for the maximum value of
non-originating materials as set out in this rule of origin may not be exceeded
through the use of Article 6 (Tolerance);

(i)

that the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed x per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product, the value of all nonoriginating materials is considered when calculating the value of nonoriginating materials. The percentage for the maximum value of nonoriginating materials as set out in this rule of origin may not be exceeded
through the use of Article 6 (Tolerance); and

(j)

that the net weight of non-originating material of tariff provision x used in
production does not exceed x per cent of the net weight of the product, the
585

specified non-originating materials may be used in the production of the
product, provided that it does not exceed the specified percentage of the net
weight of the product in accordance with the definition of “net weight of the
product” in Article 1. The percentage for the maximum weight of nonoriginating material as set out in this rule of origin may not be exceeded
through the use of Article 6 (Tolerance).
9.

The product-specific rule of origin represents the minimum amount of production
required on non-originating material for the resulting product to achieve originating
status. A greater amount of production than that required by the product-specific rule
of origin for that product also confers originating status.

10.

If a product-specific rule of origin provides that a specified non-originating material
may not be used, or that the value or weight of a specified non-originating material
cannot exceed a specific threshold, these conditions do not apply to non-originating
material classified elsewhere in the Harmonized System.

11.

In accordance with Article 5 (Sufficient Production), when a material obtains
originating status in the territory of a Party and this material is further used in the
production of a product for which origin is being determined, no account will be
taken of any non-originating material used in the production of that material. This
applies whether or not the material has acquired originating status inside the same
factory where the product is produced.

12.

The product-specific rules of origin set out in this Annex also apply to used products.

586

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Section I

Live Animals; Animal Products

Chapter 1

Live animals

01.01-01.06

All animals of Chapter 1 are wholly obtained.

Chapter 2

Meat and edible meat offal

02.01-02.10

Production in which all the material of Chapter 1 or 2 used is wholly
obtained.

Chapter 3

Fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates
Note:
Aquaculture products of Chapter 3 will only be considered as originating
in a Party if they are raised in the territory of that Party from nonoriginating or originating seedstock such as eggs, fry, fingerlings or
larvae.

03.01-03.08

Production in which all the material of Chapter 3 used is wholly obtained.

Chapter 4

Dairy produce; birds’ eggs; natural honey; edible products of animal
origin, not elsewhere specified or included

04.01

A change from any other chapter, except from dairy preparations of
subheading 1901.90 containing more than 10 per cent by dry weight of
milk solids, provided that all the material of Chapter 4 used is wholly
obtained.

0402.10

A change from any other chapter, except from dairy preparations of
subheading 1901.90 containing more than 10 per cent by dry weight of
milk solids, provided that:
(a) all the material of Chapter 4 used is wholly obtained, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product.

587

Harmonized
System
classification
0402.21-0402.99

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from any other chapter, except from dairy preparations of
subheading 1901.90 containing more than 10 per cent by dry weight of
milk solids, provided that:
(a) all the material of Chapter 4 used is wholly obtained, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

04.03-04.06

A change from any other chapter, except from dairy preparations of
subheading 1901.90 containing more than 10 per cent by dry weight of
milk solids, provided that:
(a) all the material of Chapter 4 used is wholly obtained, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

04.07-04.10

Production in which:
(a) all the material of Chapter 4 used is wholly obtained; and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

Chapter 5

Products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included

0501.00-0511.99

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

Section II

Vegetable Products
Note:
Agricultural and horticultural products grown in the territory of a Party
shall be treated as originating in the territory of that Party even if grown
from seed, bulbs, rootstock, cuttings, slips, grafts, shoots, buds or other
live parts of plants imported from a non-Party.

588

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 6

Live trees and other plants; bulbs, roots and the like; cut flowers and
ornamental foliage

06.01-06.04

Production in which all the material of Chapter 6 used is wholly obtained.

Chapter 7

Edible vegetables and certain roots and tubers

07.01-07.09

Production in which all the material of Chapter 7 used is wholly obtained.

0710.10-0710.80

Production in which all the material of Chapter 7 used is wholly obtained.

0710.90

A change from any other subheading, provided that:
A. the net weight of non-originating asparagus, beans, broccoli, cabbage,
carrots, cauliflower, courgettes, cucumbers, gherkins, globe
artichokes, mushrooms, onions, peas, potatoes, sweet corn, sweet
peppers and tomatoes of Chapter 7 used in production does not exceed
20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
B. the net weight of non-originating vegetables of Chapter 7 used in
production does not exceed 50 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

07.11

Production in which all the material of Chapter 7 used is wholly obtained.

0712.20-0712.39

Production in which all the material of Chapter 7 used is wholly obtained.

0712.90

A change to mixtures of dried vegetables from single dried vegetables
from within this subheading or any other subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating cabbage, carrots, courgettes,
cucumbers, gherkins, globe artichokes, mushrooms, potatoes, sweet
corn, sweet peppers, tomatoes and turnips of Chapter 7 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating vegetables of Chapter 7 used in
production does not exceed 50 per cent of the net weight of the
product;

589

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

or
For any other product of subheading 0712.90, production in which all the
material of Chapter 7 used is wholly obtained.
07.13-07.14

Production in which all the material of Chapter 7 used is wholly obtained.

Chapter 8

Edible fruits and nuts; peel of citrus fruit or melons

08.01-08.10

Production in which all the material of Chapter 8 used is wholly obtained.

08.11

Production in which:
(a) all the material of Chapter 8 used is wholly obtained, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product.

08.12

Production in which all the material of Chapter 8 used is wholly obtained.

0813.10-0813.40

Production in which all the material of Chapter 8 used is wholly obtained.

0813.50

A change from any other subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating almonds, apples, apricots, bananas,
cherries, chestnuts, citrus fruit, figs, grapes, hazelnuts, nectarines,
peaches, pears, plums and walnuts of Chapter 8 used in production
does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating fruits and nuts other than almonds,
apples, apricots, bananas, brazil nuts, carambola, cashew apples,
cashew nuts, cherries, chestnuts, citrus fruit, coconuts, figs, grapes,
guava, hazelnuts, jackfruit, lychees, macadamia nuts, mangoes,
mangosteens, nectarines, papaws (papaya), passion fruit, peaches,
pears, pistachios, pitahaya, plums, tamarinds or walnuts of Chapter 8
used in production does not exceed 50 per cent of the net weight of
the product, and
(c) the net weight of non-originating fruits and nuts of Chapter 8 used in
production does not exceed 80 per cent of the net weight of the

590

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

product.
08.14

Production in which all the material of Chapter 8 used is wholly obtained.

Chapter 9

Coffee, tea, maté and spices

0901.11-0901.90

A change from any other subheading.

0902.10-0910.99

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

Chapter 10

Cereals

10.01-10.08

All the cereals of Chapter 10 are wholly obtained.

Chapter 11

Products of the milling industry; malt; starches; inulin; wheat gluten

11.01-11.09

Production in which all the material of heading 07.01, subheading
0710.10, Chapter 10 or 11, or heading 23.02 or 23.03 used is wholly
obtained.

Chapter 12

Oil seeds and oleaginous fruits; miscellaneous grains, seeds and fruit;
industrial or medicinal plants; straw and fodder

12.01-12.07

A change from any other heading.

12.08

A change from any other chapter.

12.09-12.14

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 13

Lac; gums, resins and other vegetable saps and extracts

1301.20-1301.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

1302.11-1302.39

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading, provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

591

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 14

Vegetable plaiting materials; vegetable products not elsewhere
specified or included

1401.10-1404.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

Section III

Animal or Vegetable Fats and Oils and their Cleavage Products;
Prepared Edible Fats; Animal or Vegetable Waxes

Chapter 15

Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products;
prepared edible fats; animal or vegetable waxes

15.01-15.04

A change from any other heading.

15.05

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

15.06

A change from any other heading.

15.07-15.08

A change from any other chapter.

15.09-15.10

Production in which all the olive oils of heading 15.09 or 15.10 are
wholly obtained.

15.11-15.15

A change from any other chapter.

1516.10

A change from any other heading.

1516.20

A change from any other chapter.

15.17

A change from any other heading, except from heading 15.07 through
15.15, subheading 1516.20 or heading 15.18.
Note:
For the purposes of the rule of origin for heading 15.18 which references
insoluble impurity content, this content is to be measured using American
Oil Chemists' Society method Ca 3a-46.

592

Harmonized
System
classification
15.18

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change to single vegetable fats or oils or their fractions from any other
chapter;
or
A change to inedible mixtures of animal or vegetable fats or oils or their
fractions, or preparations thereof, containing 0.15 per cent or less by net
weight of insoluble impurities from within this heading or any other
heading, provided that the production reduces the insoluble impurity
content;
or
A change to any other product of heading 15.18 from any other heading.

15.20

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

15.21-15.22

A change from any other heading.

Section IV

Prepared Foodstuffs; Beverages, Spirits and Vinegar; Tobacco and
Manufactured Tobacco Substitutes

Chapter 16

Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other
aquatic invertebrates

16.01-16.02

A change from any other chapter, except from Chapter 2.

16.03

A change from any other chapter, except from Chapter 2 or 3.

16.04-16.05

A change from any other chapter, except from Chapter 3.

Chapter 17

Sugars and sugar confectionary

17.01

A change from any other heading.

17.02

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 1701.91 or

593

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

1701.99, provided that the net weight of non-originating material of
heading 11.01 through 11.08, subheading 1701.11 or 1701.12 or heading
17.03 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of
the product.
17.03

A change from any other heading.

17.04

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a)
(i) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does
not exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product; or
(ii) the value of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 30 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product; and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

Chapter 18

Cocoa and cocoa preparations

18.01-18.02

A change from any other heading.

1803.10-1803.20

A change from any other subheading.

18.04-18.05

A change from any other heading.

18.06

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a)
(i) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does
not exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product; or
(ii) the value of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 30 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in

594

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.
Chapter 19

Preparations of cereals, flour, starch or milk; pastrycooks’ products

19.01

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 30 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product, and
(d) the net weight of non-originating sugar and non-originating material
of Chapter 4 used in production does not exceed 40 per cent of the net
weight of the product.

1902.11-1902.19

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the weight of the net weight
of the product.

1902.20

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 2, 3 or 16 used

595

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(c) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(d) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.
1902.30-1902.40

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

19.03

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

1904.10-1904.20

A change from any other heading, provided that:

596

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 30 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product, and
(d) the net weight of non-originating sugar and non-originating material
of Chapter 4 used in production does not exceed 40 per cent of the net
weight of the product.
1904.30

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

1904.90

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 30 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product, and
(d) the net weight of non-originating sugar and non-originating material

597

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

of Chapter 4 used in production does not exceed 40 per cent of the net
weight of the product.
19.05

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product, and
(d) the net weight of non-originating sugar and non-originating material
of Chapter 4 used in production does not exceed 50 per cent of the net
weight of the product.

Chapter 20

Preparations of vegetables, fruit, nuts or other parts of plants

20.01

A change from any other heading.

20.02-20.03

A change from any other heading, in which all the material of Chapter 7
used is wholly obtained.

20.04-20.05

A change from any other heading.

20.06

A change to preparations of blueberries, cherries, cranberries,
loganberries, raspberries, Saskatoon berries or strawberries from any
other heading, provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used
in production does not exceed 60 per cent of the net weight of the
product; or
A change to any other product of heading 20.06 from any other heading,
provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production
does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

598

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

2007.10-2007.91

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2007.99

A change to jams, fruit jellies, fruit spreads or fruit butters from any other
heading, provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production does not exceed 60 per cent of the net weight of the product;
or
A change to any other product of subheading 2007.99 from any other
heading provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.
Note:
For the purposes of the rules of origin for preparations of blueberries,
cherries, cranberries, loganberries, raspberries, Saskatoon berries or
strawberries of heading 20.08, the net weight of the product may be the
net weight of all material used in production of the product excluding the
net weight of water of heading 22.01 that is added during the production
of the product. The net weight of any fruit used in production may be the
net weight of the fruit whether or not frozen or cut but not further
processed.

2008.11-2008.19

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 40 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2008.20-2008.50

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2008.60

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 60 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

599

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

2008.70

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2008.80

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 60 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2008.91

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2008.93

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 60 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2008.97

A change to mixtures containing blueberries, cherries, cranberries,
loganberries, raspberries, Saskatoon berries or strawberries from any
other heading, provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used
in production does not exceed 60 per cent of the net weight of the
product; or
A change to any other product of subheading 2008.97 from any other
heading, provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production does not exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product.

2008.99

A change to preparations of blueberries, loganberries, raspberries, or
Saskatoon berries from any other heading, provided that the net weight of
non-originating sugar used in production does not exceed 60 per cent of
the net weight of the product; or
A change to any other product of subheading 2008.99 from any other
heading, provided that the net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production does not exceed 20 percent of the net weight of the product.

2009.11-2009.79

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the

600

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

net weight of the product.
2009.81

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 40 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2009.89

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating sugar used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the
net weight of the product.

2009.90

A change to mixtures containing blueberry juice, cranberry juice,
elderberry juice, loganberry juice or Saskatoon berry juice from any other
subheading, except from non-originating blueberry juice, cranberry juice,
elderberry juice, loganberry juice or Saskatoon berry juice of heading
20.09, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating juice of heading 20.09 in single
strength form used in production does not exceed 40 per cent of the
net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product; or
A change to any other product of subheading 2009.90 from any other
heading, provided that net weight of non-originating sugar used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product.

Chapter 21

Miscellaneous edible preparations

2101.11-2101.30

A change from any other subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

601

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

2102.10-2102.30

A change from any other subheading.

2103.10

A change from any other subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07 through
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net
weight of the product.

2103.20

A change to tomato ketchup or barbeque sauce from any other
subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07, 04.08 or
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net
weight of the product, and
(c) the net weight of non-originating sugar and non-originating material
of heading 04.07, 04.08 or 04.10 used in production does not exceed
50 per cent of the net weight of the product; or
A change to any other product of subheading 2103.20 from any other
subheading, provided that
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07 through
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net
weight of the product.

2103.30

A change from any other subheading, provided that:

602

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07 through
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net
weight of the product.
Note:
For the purposes of the rule of origin for subheading 2103.90, mixed
condiments and mixed seasonings are food preparations that may be
added to a food in order to enhance or impart flavour during the food’s
manufacture or preparation before it is served, or after the food has been
served.
2103.90

A change to barbeque sauce, fruit-based sauces, mixed condiments or
mixed seasonings from any other subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07, 04.08 or
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net
weight of the product, and
the net weight of non-originating sugar and non-originating material of
heading 04.07, 04.08 or 04.10 used in production does not exceed 50 per
cent of the net weight of the product; or
A change to any other product of subheading 2103.90 from any other
subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07 through
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net

603

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

weight of the product.
2104.10-2105.00

A change from any other subheading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

21.06

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 40 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

Chapter 22

Beverages, spirits and vinegar

22.01

A change from any other heading.

2202.10

A change from any other heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

2202.90

A change to beverages containing milk from any other heading, except
from heading 04.01 through 04.06 or dairy preparations of subheading
1901.90 containing more than 10 per cent by dry weight of milk solids,
provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not

604

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of heading 04.07 through
04.10 used in production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net
weight of the product; or
A change to any other product of subheading 2202.90 from any other
heading, provided that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(b) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.
22.03

A change from any other heading.

22.04

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 0806.10,
2009.61 or 2009.69, heading 22.07 or 22.08.

22.05-22.06

A change from any other heading.

22.07-22.09

A change from any other heading outside this group, except from heading
22.04.

Chapter 23

Residues and waste from the food industries; prepared animal fodder

23.01

A change from any other heading.

23.02

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating material of Chapter 10 used in production does not exceed 20
per cent of the net weight of the product.

2303.10

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating material of Chapter 10 used in production does not exceed 20
per cent of the net weight of the product.

2303.20-2303.30

A change from any other heading.

605

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

23.04-23.08

A change from any other heading.

23.09

A change from any other heading, except from Chapter 2 or 3, provided
that:
(a) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 10 or 11 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product,
(b) the net weight of non-originating sugar used in production does not
exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the product, and
(c) the net weight of non-originating material of Chapter 4 used in
production does not exceed 20 per cent of the net weight of the
product.

Chapter 24

Tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes
Note:
Agricultural and horticultural products grown in the territory of a Party
shall be treated as originating in the territory of that Party even if grown
from seed, bulbs, rootstock, cuttings, slips, grafts, shoots, buds or other
live parts of plants imported from a non-Party.

24.01

Production in which all the material of heading 24.01 used is wholly
obtained.

2402.10

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating material of Chapter 24 used in production does not exceed 30
per cent of the net weight of all the material of Chapter 24 used in the
production of the product.

2402.20

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 2403.10,
provided that the net weight of the material of heading 24.01 that is
wholly obtained is at least 10 per cent by net weight of all the material of
Chapter 24 used in the production of the product.

606

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

2402.90

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating material of Chapter 24 used in production does not exceed 30
per cent of the net weight of all the material of Chapter 24 used in the
production of the product.

24.03

A change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of nonoriginating material of Chapter 24 used in production does not exceed 30
per cent of the net weight of all the material of Chapter 24 used in the
production of the product.

Section V

Mineral Products

Chapter 25

Salt; sulphur; earths and stone; plastering materials; lime and
cement

25.01-25.03

A change from any other heading.

2504.10-2504.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

25.05-25.14

A change from any other heading.

2515.11-2516.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

25.17

A change from any other heading.

2518.10-2520.20

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

25.21-25.23

A change from any other heading.

2524.10-2525.30

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

25.26-25.29

A change from any other heading.

2530.10-2530.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

607

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 26

Ores, slag and ash

26.01-26.21

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 27

Mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation;
bituminous substances; mineral waxes

27.01-27.09

A change from within any one of these headings or any other heading.

27.10

A change from within this heading or any other heading, except from
biodiesel of subheading 3824.90 or heading 38.26.

27.11-27.16

A change from within any one of these headings or any other heading.

Section VI

Products of the Chemical or Allied Industries

Chapter 28

Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of precious
metals, of rare-earth metals, of radioactive elements or of isotopes

Note 1:
A product of this Chapter is an originating product if it is the result of any
one of the following:
a) an applicable change in tariff classification specified in the rules
of origin of this Chapter;
b) a chemical reaction as described in Note 2 below; or
c) purification as described in Note 3 below.
Note 2: Chemical reaction and change of chemical abstract service
number
A product of this Chapter shall be treated as an originating product if it is
the result of a chemical reaction and that chemical reaction results in a
change of Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number.
For purposes of this Chapter, a "chemical reaction" is a process
(including a biochemical process) that results in a molecule with a new
structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new

608

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

intramolecular bonds or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a
molecule.
The following are not considered to be chemical reactions for the
purposes of determining whether a product is originating:
a) dissolution in water or in another solvent;
b) the elimination of solvents, including solvent water; or
c) the addition or elimination of water of crystallization.
Note 3: Purification
A product of this Chapter that is subject to purification shall be treated as
an originating product provided that the purification occurs in the
territory of one or both of the Parties and results in the elimination of not
less than 80 per cent of the impurities.
Note 4: Separation prohibition
A product that meets the applicable change in tariff classification in the
territory of one or both of the Parties as a result of the separation of one
or more materials from a man-made mixture shall not be treated as an
originating product unless the isolated material underwent a chemical
reaction in the territory of one or both of the Parties.
2801.10-2853.00

A change from any other subheading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from any other subheading, provided that the value of
non-originating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works
price of the product.

Chapter 29

Organic Chemicals
Note 1:
A product of this Chapter is an originating product if it is the result of any
one of the following:
a) an applicable change in tariff classification specified in the rules
of origin of this Chapter;
b) a chemical reaction as described in Note 2 below; or
c) purification as described in Note 3 below.

609

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Note 2: Chemical reaction and change of chemical abstract service
number
A product of this Chapter shall be treated as an originating product if it is
the result of a chemical reaction and that chemical reaction results in a
change of Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number.
For purposes of this Chapter, a "chemical reaction" is a process
(including a biochemical process) that results in a molecule with a new
structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and by forming new
intramolecular bonds or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a
molecule.
The following are not considered to be chemical reactions for the
purposes of determining whether a product is originating:
a) dissolution in water or in another solvent;
b) the elimination of solvents, including solvent water; or
c) the addition or elimination of water of crystallization.
Note 3: Purification
A product of this Chapter that is subject to purification shall be treated as
an originating product provided that the purification occurs in the
territory of one or both of the Parties and results in the elimination of not
less than 80 per cent of the impurities.
Note 4: Separation prohibition
A product that meets the applicable change in tariff classification in the
territory of one or both of the Parties as a result of the separation of one
or more materials from a man-made mixture shall not be treated as an
originating product unless the isolated material underwent a chemical
reaction in the territory or one or both of the Parties.
2901.10-2942.00

A change from any other subheading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from any other subheading, provided that the value of
non-originating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works
price of the product.

610

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 30

Pharmaceutical products

3001.20-3005.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

3006.10-3006.60

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

3006.70-3006.92

A change from any other subheading.

Chapter 31

Fertilisers

31.01

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

31.02

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

3103.10-3104.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

31.05

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Chapter 32

Tanning or dyeing extracts; tannins and their derivatives; dyes,
pigments and other colouring matter; paints and varnishes; putty
and other mastics; inks

3201.10-3210.00

A change from within any of these subheadings or any other subheading.

32.11-32.12

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is

611

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.
3213.10

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

3213.90

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

32.14-32.15

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Chapter 33

Essential oils
preparations

and

resinoids;

perfumery,

3301.12-3301.90

A change from any other subheading; or

cosmetic

or

toilet

A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from any other subheading, provided that the value of
non-originating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works
price of the product.
3302.10

A change from any other heading, provided that the weight of nonoriginating material of heading 17.01 or 17.02 does not exceed 20 per
cent of the net weight of the product.

612

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

3302.90

A change from any other heading.

33.03

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

33.04-33.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Chapter 34

Soap, organic surface-active agents, washing preparations,
lubricating preparations, artificial waxes, prepared waxes, polishing
or scouring preparations, candles and similar articles, modelling
pastes, "dental waxes" and dental preparations with a basis of plaster

3401.11-3401.20

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

3401.30

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 3402.90; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading except subheading 3402.90, provided that the
value of non-originating materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per
cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

3402.11-3402.19

A change from any other subheading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from any other subheading, provided that the value of
non-originating materials classified in the same subheading as the final

613

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

product does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works
price of the product.
3402.20

A change from any other subheading, except from subheading 3402.90.

3402.90

A change from any other subheading; or
A change from within this subheading, whether or not there is also a
change from any other subheading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of this subheading does not exceed 20 per cent of
the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

3403.11-3405.90

A change from any other subheading.

34.06

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

34.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that:
(a) at least one of the component products of the set is originating; and
(b) the value of the non-originating component products of this heading
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the set.

Chapter 35

Albuminoidal substances; modified starches; glues; enzymes

35.01-35.02

A change from any other heading, except from Chapter 2 through 4; or
A change from Chapter 2 through 4, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of Chapter 2 through 4 does not exceed 40 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

614

Harmonized
System
classification
35.03

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from any other heading, except from Chapter 2 other than swine
skin or Chapter 3 other than fish skin; or
A change from Chapter 2 other than swine skin or Chapter 3 other than fish
skin, whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, swine
skin of Chapter 2 or fish skin of Chapter 3, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of Chapter 2 other than swine skin or Chapter 3 other
than fish skin does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

35.04

A change to milk protein substances from any other heading, except from
Chapter 4 or dairy preparations of subheading 1901.90 containing more
than 10 per cent by dry weight of milk solids;
A change to any other product of heading 35.04 from any other heading,
except from non-originating material of Chapter 2 through 4 or heading
11.08; or
A change to any other product of heading 35.04 from Chapter 2 through 4
or heading 11.08, whether or not there is also a change from any other
heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of Chapter 2
through 4 or heading 11.08 does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

35.05

A change from any other heading, except from heading 11.08; or
A change from heading 11.08, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of
heading 11.08 does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

35.06-35.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

615

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 36

Explosives; pyrotechnic products; matches; pyrophoric alloys;
certain combustible preparations

36.01-36.06

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Chapter 37

Photographic or cinematographic goods

37.01

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

37.02

A change from any other heading, except from heading 37.01.

37.03-37.06

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

3707.10-3707.90

A change from any other subheading.

Chapter 38

Miscellaneous chemical products

38.01-38.02

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

616

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

38.03

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

38.04

A change from any other heading.

3805.10

A change to purified sulphate turpentine from any other subheading, or
from raw spirits of sulphate turpentine as a result of purification by
distillation; or
A change to any other product of subheading 3805.10 from any other
subheading.

3805.90

A change from any other subheading.

3806.10-3806.90

A change from any other subheading.

38.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

3808.50-3808.99

A change from any other subheading.

3809.10

A change from any other heading, except from heading 10.06 or 11.01
through 11.08; or
A change from heading 10.06 or 11.01 through 11.08, whether or not
there is also a change from any other heading, provided the value of nonoriginating materials of heading 10.06 or 11.01 through 11.08 does not
exceed 20 per cent of the weight of the product.

3809.91-3809.93

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

38.10

A change from any other heading; or

617

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
3811.11-3811.90

A change from any other subheading.

38.12

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

38.13-38.14

A change from any other heading.

3815.11-3815.90

A change from any other subheading.

38.16-38.19

A change from any other heading.

38.20

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 2905.31 or
2905.49; or
A change from subheading 2905.31 or 2905.49, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of subheading 2905.31 or 2905.49 does not exceed
50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

38.21-38.22

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

3823.11-3823.70

A change from any other subheading.

3824.10-3824.50

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change

618

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 20 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
3824.60

A change from any other subheading except from heading 11.01 through
11.08, 17.01, 17.02 or subheading 2905.44; or
A change from heading 11.01 through 11.08, 17.01, 17.02 or subheading
2905.44, whether or not there is also a change from any other subheading,
provided that the weight of non-originating material of heading 11.01
through 11.08, 17.01, 17.02 or subheading 2905.44 does not exceed 20
per cent of the net weight of the product.

3824.71-3824.83

A change from any other heading.

3824.90

A change to biodiesel from any other heading, provided that the biodiesel
is transesterified in the territory of a Party;
A change to products containing ethanol from any other heading, except
from ethanol of heading 22.07 or subheading 2208.90; or
A change to any other product of subheading 3824.90 from any other
heading.

38.25

A change from any other heading.

38.26

A change from any other heading, provided that the biodiesel is
transesterified in the territory of a Party.

Section VII

Plastics and Articles Thereof; Rubber and Articles Thereof

Chapter 39

Plastics and articles thereof

39.01-39.15

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product; or

619

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the net weight of
non-originating material classified in the same heading as the final
product does not exceed 50 per cent of the net weight of the product.
39.16-39.26

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 40

Rubber and articles thereof

40.01-40.11

A change from any other heading.

4012.11-4012.19

A change from any other subheading.

4012.20-4012.90

A change from any other heading.

40.13-40.16

A change from any other heading.

40.17

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

Section VIII

Raw Hides and Skins, Leather, Furskins and Articles Thereof;
Saddlery and Harness; Travel Goods, Handbags and Similar
Containers; Articles of Animal Gut (Other Than Silk-Worm Gut)

Chapter 41

Raw hides and skins (other than furskins) and leather

41.01-41.03

A change from any other heading.

4104.11-4104.19

A change from any other heading.

4104.41-4104.49

A change from any other subheading.

4105.10

A change from any other heading.

4105.30

A change from any other subheading.

4106.21

A change from any other heading.

4106.22

A change from any other subheading.

620

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

4106.31

A change from any other heading.

4106.32

A change from any other subheading.

4106.40

A change from within this subheading or any other subheading.

4106.91

A change from any other heading.

4106.92

A change from any other subheading.

41.07-41.13

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 4104.41,
4104.49, 4105.30, 4106.22, 4106.32 or 4106.92; or
A change from subheading 4104.41, 4104.49, 4105.30, 4106.22, 4106.32
or 4106.92, whether or not there is also a change from any other heading,
provided that materials of subheading 4104.41, 4104.49, 4105.30,
4106.22, 4106.32 or 4106.92 undergo a retanning operation in the
territory of a Party.

41.14-41.15

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 42

Articles of leather; saddlery and harness; travel goods, handbags and
similar containers; articles of animal gut (other than silk-worm gut)

42.01-42.06

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 43

Furskins and artificial fur; manufactures thereof

43.01

A change from any other heading.

4302.11-4302.30

A change from any other subheading.

43.03-43.04

A change from any other heading.

Section IX

Wood and Articles of Wood; Wood Charcoal; Cork and Articles of
Cork; Manufactures of Straw, of Esparto or of Other Plaiting
Materials; Basketware and Wickerwork

Chapter 44

Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal

621

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

44.01-44.21

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 45

Cork and articles of cork

45.01-45.04

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 46

Manufactures of straw, of esparto or of other plaiting materials;
basketware and wickerwork

46.01-46.02

A change from any other heading.

Section X

Pulp of Wood or of Other Fibrous Cellulosic Material; Recovered
(Waste and Scrap) Paper or Paperboard; Paper and Paperboard and
Articles Thereof

Chapter 47

Pulp of wood or of other fibrous cellulosic material; recovered (waste
and scrap) paper or paperboard

47.01-47.07

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 48

Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of paper or of
paperboard

48.01-48.09

A change from any other heading.

4810.13-4811.90

A change from any other subheading.

48.12-48.23

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 49

Printed books, newspapers, pictures and other products of the
printing industry; manuscripts, typescripts and plans

49.01-49.11

A change from any other heading.

Section XI

Textiles and Textile Articles

Chapter 50

Silk

50.01-50.02

A change from any other heading.

622

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

50.03

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

50.04-50.06

Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres, accompanied
by spinning or twisting.

50.07

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres, extrusion of man-made
filament yarn or twisting, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving accompanied by dyeing;
Yarn dyeing accompanied by weaving; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Chapter 51

Wool, fine or coarse animal hair; horsehair yarn and woven fabric

51.01-51.05

A change from any other heading.

51.06-51.10

Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied
by spinning.

51.11-51.13

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving accompanied by dyeing;
Yarn dyeing accompanied by weaving; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Chapter 52

Cotton

623

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

52.01-52.03

A change from any other heading.

52.04-52.07

Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied
by spinning.

52.08-52.12

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving, accompanied by dyeing or coating;
Yarn dyeing accompanied by weaving; or
Printing, accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Chapter 53

Other vegetable textile fibres; paper yarn and woven fabrics of paper
yarn

53.01-53.05

A change from any other heading.

53.06-53.08

Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied
by spinning.

53.09-53.11

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving, accompanied by dyeing or coating;
Yarn dyeing accompanied by weaving; or
Printing, accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

624

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 54

Man-made filaments

54.01-54.06

Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied, if necessary, by spinning or
spinning of natural fibres.

54.07-54.08

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving, accompanied by dyeing or coating;
Twisting or texturing, accompanied by weaving provided that the value of
the non-twisted or non-textured yarns used does not exceed 47.5 per cent
of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product; or
Printing, accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Chapter 55

Man-made staple fibres

55.01-55.07

Extrusion of man-made fibres.

55.08-55.11

Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied
by spinning.

55.12-55.16

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving, accompanied by dyeing or coating;
Yarn dyeing accompanied by weaving; or
Printing, accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

625

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 56

Wadding, felt and non-wovens; special yarns; twine, cordage, ropes
and cables and articles thereof

56.01

A change from any other chapter.

5602.10

Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by fabric formation, however
polypropylene filament of heading 54.02, polypropylene fibres of heading
55.03 or 55.06, or polypropylene filament tow of heading 55.01, of which
the denomination in all cases of a single filament or fibre is less than 9
decitex may be used, provided that their total value does not exceed 40
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product; or
Fabric formation alone in the case of felt made from natural fibres.

5602.21-5602.90

Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by fabric formation; or
Fabric formation alone in the case of other felt made from natural fibres.

56.03

Extrusion of man-made fibres or use of natural fibres, accompanied by
nonwoven techniques including needle punching.

5604.10

A change from any other heading.

5604.90
-Rubber thread
(textile covered)

Production from rubber thread or cord, not textile covered.

-Other

Spinning of natural fibres or extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied
by spinning.

56.05

A change from any other heading, except from yarn of heading 50.04
through 50.06, 51.06 through 51.10, 52.04 through 52.07, 53.06 through
53.08, 54.01 through 54.06 or 55.09 through 55.11;
Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning, or spinning of
natural or man-made staple fibres.

56.06

A change from any other heading, except from yarn of heading 50.04
through 50.06, 51.06 through 51.10, 52.04 through 52.07, 53.06 through
53.08, 54.01 through 54.06 or 55.09 through 55.11;

626

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning, or spinning of
natural or man-made staple fibres;
Spinning accompanied by flocking; or
Flocking accompanied by dyeing.
56.07

A change from any other heading, except from yarn of heading 50.04
through 50.06, 51.06 through 51.10, 52.04 through 52.07, 53.06 through
53.08, 54.01 through 54.06 or 55.09 through 55.11;
Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of
natural fibres; or
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing.

56.08

Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of
natural fibres; or
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing.

56.09

A change from any other heading, except from yarn of heading 50.04
through 50.06, 51.06 through 51.10, 52.04 through 52.07, 54.01 through
54.06 or 55.09 through 55.11;
Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by spinning or spinning of
natural fibres; or
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing.

Chapter 57

Carpets and other textile floor coverings
Note: For products of this Chapter jute fabric may be used as a backing.

57.01-57.05

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Production from coir yarn, sisal yarn or jute yarn;
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing;

627

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Tufting, accompanied by dyeing or printing; or
Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by non-woven techniques
including needle punching, however polypropylene filament of heading
54.02, polypropylene fibres of heading 55.03 or 55.06, or polypropylene
filament tow of heading 55.01, of which the denomination in all cases of a
single filament or fibre is less than 9 decitex, may be used, provided that
their total value does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or
ex-works price of the product.
Chapter 58

Special woven fabrics; tufted textile fabrics; lace; tapestries;
trimmings; embroidery
Note: For products of heading 58.11, the materials used to produce
wadding must be extruded in the territory of one or both of the Parties.

58.01-58.04

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving;
Weaving, accompanied by dyeing, flocking or coating;
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing;
Yarn dyeing accompanied by weaving; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

58.05

A change from any other heading.

58.06-58.09

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving or fabric formation;
Weaving or fabric formation, accompanied by dyeing, flocking or
coating;
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing;

628

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Yarn dyeing, accompanied by weaving or fabric formation; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
58.10

Production in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

58.11

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving, knitting or nonwoven process;
Weaving, knitting or non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing, flocking or coating;
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing;
Yarn dyeing, accompanied by weaving, knitting or non-woven process; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Chapter 59

Impregnated, coated, covered or laminated textile fabrics; textile
articles of a kind suitable for industrial use

59.01

Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing, flocking or coating; or
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing.

59.02
-Containing not
more than 90 per

Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process.

629

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

cent by weight of
textile materials
-Other

Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by weaving, knitting or a
non-woven process.

59.03

Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing or coating; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

59.04

Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing or coating.

59.05
-Impregnated,
Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
coated, covered
dyeing or coating.
or laminated with
rubber, plastics
or other materials
-Other
Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by weaving, knitting or a nonwoven process;
Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing or coating; or
Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the ex-works price
of the product.
59.06

630

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

-Knitted or
crocheted fabrics

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by knitting;
Knitting, accompanied by dyeing or coating; or
Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by knitting.

-Other fabrics
Extrusion of man-made fibres accompanied by weaving, knitting or a
made of synthetic non-woven process.
filament yarn,
containing more
than 90 per cent
by weight of
textile materials
-Other

Weaving, or knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied
by dyeing or coating; or
Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by weaving, knitting or
forming.

59.07

A change from any other chapter, except from fabric of heading 50.07,
51.11 through 51.13, 52.08 through 52.12, 53.10, 53.11, 54.07, 54.08,
55.12 through 55.16, 56.02, 56.03, Chapter 57, heading 58.03, 58.06,
58.08 or 60.02 through 60.06;
Weaving, accompanied by dyeing, flocking or coating;
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing; or
Printing, accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations
(such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising,
calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and burling), provided that the value of the
unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

59.08
-Incandescent gas Production from tubular knitted gas-mantle fabric.
mantles,
impregnated

631

Harmonized
System
classification

-Other
59.09-59.11
-Polishing discs
or rings other
than of felt of
heading 5911
-Woven fabrics,
of a kind
commonly used
in papermaking
or other technical
uses, felted or
not, whether or
not impregnated
or coated, tubular
or endless with
single or multiple
warp or weft, or
flat woven with
multiple warp or
weft of heading
59.11

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from any other heading.

Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process.

Spinning of natural or of man-made staple fibres, in each case
accompanied by weaving or knitting; or
Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing or coating, provided that only one or more of the following
materials are used:
-coir yarn,
-yarn of polytetrafluoroethylene,
-yarn, multiple, of polyamide, coated impregnated or covered with a
phenolic resin,
-yarn of synthetic textile fibres of aromatic polyamides, obtained by
polycondensation of m-phenylenediamine and isophthalic acid,
-monofil of polytetrafluoroethylene,
-yarn of synthetic textile fibres of poly(p-phenylene terephthalamide),
-glass fibre yarn, coated with phenol resin and gimped with acrylic yarn,
-copolyester monofilaments of a polyester, a resin of terephthalic acid,
1,4-cyclohexanediethanol and isophthalic acid.

-Other
Extrusion of man-made filament yarn or spinning of natural or man-made
staple fibres, in each case accompanied by weaving, knitting or a nonwoven process; or
Weaving, knitting or a non-woven process, in each case accompanied by
dyeing or coating.
Chapter 60

Knitted or crocheted fabrics

60.01-60.06

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by knitting;
Knitting, accompanied by dyeing, flocking or coating;
Flocking, accompanied by dyeing or printing;

632

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by knitting; or
Twisting or texturing, accompanied by knitting provided that the value of
the non-twisted or non-textured yarns used does not exceed 47.5 per cent
of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
Chapter 61
61.01-61.17
-Obtained by
sewing together
or otherwise
assembling, two
or more pieces of
knitted or
crocheted fabric
which have been
either cut to form
or obtained
directly to form
-Other (knit to
shape products)

Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted

Knitting or crocheting and making-up (including cutting).

Spinning of natural or man-made staple fibres or extrusion of man-made
filament yarn, in each case accompanied by knitting or crocheting; or
Dyeing of yarn of natural fibres accompanied by knitting or crocheting.

Chapter 62

Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or crocheted

62.01

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing, accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.02
-Women’s, or
girls’ clothing,

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or

633

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

embroidered

Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.03

Weaving accompanied by making up (including cutting); or
Making up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.04
-Women’s, or
girls’ clothing,
embroidered

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making up (including cutting); or
Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
Weaving accompanied by making up (including cutting); or
Making up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.05

Weaving accompanied by making up (including cutting); or
Making up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat

634

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
62.06
-Women’s, or
girls’ clothing,
embroidered

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.07-62.08

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.09
-Women’s, or
girls’ clothing,
embroidered

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent

635

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
62.10
-Fire-resistant
equipment of
fabric covered
with foil of
aluminised
polyester
-Other

Production from yarn; or
Production from uncoated fabric, provided that the value of the uncoated
fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price of the
product.

Weaving or other fabric formation process, accompanied by making-up
(including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.11
-Women’s, or
girls’ clothing,
embroidered

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.12

Knitting or weaving, accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory

636

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
62.13-62.14
-Embroidered

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting);
Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product; or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.15

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.16
-Fire-resistant
equipment of
fabric covered

Production from yarn; or
Production from uncoated fabric, provided that the value of the uncoated

637

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

with foil of
aluminised
polyester

fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price of the
product.

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Making-up preceded by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory
or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat
setting, raising, calendering, shrink resistance processing, permanent
finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling), provided that
the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

62.17
-Embroidered

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

-Fire-resistant
equipment of
fabric covered
with foil of
aluminised
polyester

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Coating provided that the value of the uncoated fabric used does not
exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
product accompanied by making-up (including cutting).

-Interlinings for
collars and cuffs,
cut out

Production from materials of any heading, except that of the product, and
in which the value of all the non-originating materials used does not
exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
product.

-Other

Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting).

Chapter 63

Other made up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn textile
articles; rags

63.01-63.04
-Of felt, of
nonwovens
-Other,
embroidered

Extrusion of man-made fibres or use of natural fibres, in each case
accompanied by a non-woven process including needle punching and
making-up (including cutting).
Weaving or knitting, accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or

638

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Production from unembroidered fabric, provided that the value of the
unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
-Other, not
embroidered
63.05

Weaving or knitting, accompanied by making-up (including cutting).
Extrusion of man-made fibres or spinning of natural or man-made staple
fibres, in each case accompanied by weaving or knitting and making-up
(including cutting); or
Extrusion of man-made fibres or use of natural fibres, in each case
accompanied by any non-woven techniques including needle punching
and making-up (including cutting).

63.06
-Of nonwovens

-Other

Extrusion of man-made fibres or use of natural fibres, in each case
accompanied by any non-woven techniques including needle punching.
Weaving accompanied by making-up (including cutting); or
Coating, provided that the value of the uncoated fabric used does not
exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
product, accompanied by making-up (including cutting).

63.07

Production in which the value of non-originating materials used does not
exceed 40 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
product.

63.08

A change from any other chapter, provided that either the fabric or the
yarn meets the rule of origin that would be applicable if the fabric or yarn
were classified alone.

63.09

A change from any other heading.

63.10

A change from any other heading.

Section XII

Footwear, Headgear, Umbrellas, Sun Umbrellas, Walking-Sticks,
Seat-Sticks, Whips, Riding-Crops and Parts Thereof; Prepared
Feathers and Articles Made Therewith; Artificial Flowers; Articles of
Human Hair

639

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 64

Footwear, gaiters and the like; parts of such articles

64.01-64.05

A change from any other heading, except from assemblies of uppers
affixed to inner soles or to other sole components of heading 6406.

64.06

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 65

Headgear and parts thereof

65.01-65.07

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 66

Umbrellas, sun umbrellas, walking-sticks, seat-sticks, whips, ridingcrops and parts thereof

66.01-66.03

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 67

Prepared feathers and down and articles made of feathers or of
down; artificial flowers; articles of human hair

67.01

A change to articles of feather or down from within this heading or any
other heading; or
A change to any other product of heading 67.01 from any other heading.

67.02-67.04

A change from any other heading.

Section XIII

Articles of Stone, Plaster, Cement, Asbestos, Mica or Similar
Materials; Ceramic Products; Glass and Glassware

Chapter 68

Articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos, mica or similar materials

68.01-68.02

A change from any other heading.

68.03

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

68.04-68.11

A change from any other heading.

6812.80-6812.99

A change from any other subheading.

640

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

68.13

A change from any other heading.

6814.10-6814.90

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading.

68.15

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 69

Ceramic products

69.01-69.14

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 70

Glass and glassware

70.01-70.05

A change from any other heading.

70.06

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

70.07-70.08

A change from any other heading.

7009.10

A change from any other subheading.

7009.91-7009.92

A change from any other heading.

70.10

A change from any other heading; or
A change to cut glassware from uncut glassware of heading 70.10,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of the non-originating uncut glassware does not exceed 50
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

70.11

A change from any other heading.

70.13

A change from any other heading; or
A change to cut glassware from uncut glassware of heading 70.13,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of the non-originating uncut glassware does not exceed 50
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

641

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

70.14-70.18

A change from any other heading.

7019.11-7019.40

A change from any other heading.

7019.51

A change from any other subheading, except from subheading 7019.52
through 7019.59.

7019.52-7019.90

A change from any other subheading.

70.20

A change from any other heading.

Section XIV

Natural or Cultured Pearls, Precious or Semi-Precious Stones,
Precious Metals, Metals Clad with Precious Metal and Articles
Thereof; Imitations Jewellery; Coin

Chapter 71

Natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, precious
metals, metals clad with precious metal, and articles thereof;
imitation jewellery; coin

71.01

A change from any other heading.

7102.10

A change from any other heading.

7102.21-7102.39

A change from any other subheading, except from subheading 7102.10.

7103.10-7104.90

A change from any other subheading.

71.05

A change from any other heading.

7106.10-7106.92

A change from any other subheading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from another subheading, provided that the nonoriginating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product undergo electrolytic, thermal or chemical separation or alloying.

71.07

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

7108.11-7108.20

A change from any other subheading; or

642

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from another subheading, provided that the nonoriginating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product undergo electrolytic, thermal or chemical separation or alloying.
71.09

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

7110.11-7110.49

A change from any other subheading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from another subheading, provided that the nonoriginating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product undergo electrolytic, thermal or chemical separation or alloying.

71.11

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

71.12-71.15

A change from any other heading.

71.16-71.17

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

71.18

A change from any other heading.

Section XV

Base Metals and Articles of Base Metal

Chapter 72

Iron and steel

72.01-72.07

A change from any other heading.

72.08-72.17

A change from any heading outside this group.

72.18

A change from any other heading.

72.19-72.23

A change from any heading outside this group.

643

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

72.24

A change from any other heading.

72.25-72.29

A change from any heading outside this group.

Chapter 73

Articles of iron or steel

73.01-73.03

A change from any other heading.

7304.11-7304.39

A change from any other heading.

7304.41

A change from any other subheading.

7304.49-7304.90

A change from any other heading.

73.05-73.06

A change from any other heading.

7307.11-7307.19

A change from any other heading.

7307.21-7307.29

A change from any other heading, except from forged blanks of heading
72.07; or
A change from forged blanks of heading 72.07, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of the nonoriginating forged blanks of heading 72.07 does not exceed 50 per cent of
the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

7307.91-7307.99

A change from any other heading.

73.08

A change from any other heading, except from subheading 7301.20; or
A change from subheading 7301.20, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of subheading 7301.20 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

73.09-73.14

A change from any other heading.

73.15

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change

644

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
73.16-73.20

A change from any other heading.

73.21

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

73.22-73.23

A change from any other heading.

73.24

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

73.25-73.26

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 74

Copper and articles thereof

74.01-74.02

A change from any other heading.

7403.11-7403.29

A change from any other subheading.

74.04-74.19

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 75

Nickel and articles thereof

75.01-75.08

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 76

Aluminium and articles thereof

7601.10-7601.20

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other

645

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

subheading.
76.02-76.06

A change from any other heading.

76.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

76.08-76.16

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 78

Lead and articles thereof

7801.10

A change from any other subheading.

7801.91-7801.99

A change from any other heading.

78.02-78.06

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 79

Zinc and articles thereof

79.01-79.07

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 80

Tin and articles thereof

80.01-80.07

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 81

Other base metals; cermets; articles thereof

8101.10-8113.00

A change from any other subheading.

Chapter 82

Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons and forks, of base metal; parts
thereof of base metal

Note: Handles of base metal used in the production of a product of this
chapter shall be disregarded in determining the origin of that product.

646

Harmonized
System
classification
82.01-82.04

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8205.10-8205.70

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, except from subheading 8205.90,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of non-originating materials of this heading, other than
subheading 8205.90 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value
or ex-works price of the product.

8205.90

A change from any other heading;
A change to anvils, portable forges, hand or pedal-operated grinding
wheels from within this heading, except from a set of subheading
8205.90, whether or not there is also a change from any other heading,
provided that the value of the non-originating materials of this heading,
other than a set of subheading 8205.90, does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product; or
A change to a set from any other product of this heading, whether or not
there is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of
the non-originating component products of this heading does not exceed
25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the set.

82.06

A change from any other heading, except from heading 82.02 through
82.05; or
A change from heading 82.02 through 82.05, whether or not there is also
a change from any other heading, provided that the value of the nonoriginating component products of heading 82.02 through 82.05 does not
exceed 25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the set.

8207.13

A change from any other heading, except from heading 82.09; or
A change from subheading 8207.19 or heading 82.09, whether or not
there is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of

647

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

non-originating materials of subheading 8207.19 or heading 82.09 does
not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
product.
8207.19-8207.90

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings, whether or not there
is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same subheading as the final
product does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works
price of the product.

82.08-82.10

A change from any other heading.

8211.10

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 8211.91 through 8211.95, whether or not there
is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of the
non-originating component products of subheading 8211.91 through
8211.93 does not exceed 25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works
price of the set.

8211.91-8211.93

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 8211.94 or 8211.95, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of subheading 8211.94 does not exceed 50 per cent
of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

8211.94-8211.95

A change from any other heading.

82.12-82.13

A change from any other heading.

8214.10

A change from any other heading.

8214.20

A change from any other heading; or
A change to a set of subheading 8214.20 from within this subheading,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of the non-originating component products of subheading
8214.20 does not exceed 25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works

648

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

price of the set.
8214.90

A change from any other heading.

8215.10-8215.20

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 8215.91 through 8215.99, whether or not there
is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of the
non-originating component products of heading 8215.91 through 8215.99
does not exceed 25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8215.91-8215.99

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 83

Miscellaneous articles of base metal

8301.10-8301.50

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 8301.60, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of subheading 8301.60 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

8301.60-8301.70

A change from any other heading.

8302.10-8302.30

A change from any other heading.

8302.41

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

8302.42-8302.50

A change from any other heading.

8302.60

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating

649

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
83.03-83.04

A change from any other heading.

83.05

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 8305.90, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of subheading 8305.90 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

83.06

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

83.07

A change from any other heading.

83.08

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 8308.90, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of subheading 8308.90 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

83.09-83.10

A change from any other heading.

83.11

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Section XVI

Machinery and Mechanical Appliances; Electrical Equipment; Parts
Thereof; Sound Recorders and Reproducers, Television Image and
Sound Recorders and Reproducers, And Parts and Accessories of
Such Articles

650

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

Chapter 84

Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances;
parts thereof

84.01-84.12

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8413.11-8413.82

A change from any other subheading.

8413.91-8413.92

A change from any other heading.

84.14-84.15

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8416.10-8417.90

A change from any other subheading.

84.18-84.22

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8423.10-8426.99

A change from any other subheading.

84.27

A change from any other heading except from heading 84.31; or
A change from heading 84.31, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of
heading 84.31 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

651

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

8428.10-8430.69

A change from any other subheading.

84.31

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

8432.10-8442.50

A change from any other subheading.

84.43

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

8444.00-8449.00

A change from any other subheading.

84.50-84.52

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8453.10-8454.90

A change from any other subheading.

84.55

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

84.56-84.65

A change from any other heading, except from heading 84.66; or
A change from within any one of these headings or heading 84.66,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided

652

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

that the value of non-originating materials classified in the same heading
as the final product or heading 84.66 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
84.66

A change from any other heading.

84.67-84.68

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8469.00-8472.90

A change from any other subheading.

84.73

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

8474.10-8479.90

A change from any other subheading.

84.80-84.83

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8484.10-8484.20

A change from any other subheading.

8484.90

A change from any other subheading, provided the value of the nonoriginating component products does not exceed 25 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the set.

84.86

A change from any other heading; or

653

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
8487.10-8487.90

A change from any other subheading.

Chapter 85

Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound
recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and
reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles

85.01-85.02

A change from any other heading, except from heading 85.03; or
A change from within any one of these headings or heading 85.03,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of non-originating materials classified in the same heading
as the final product or heading 85.03 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

85.03-85.16

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

8517.11-8517.62

A change from any other subheading.

8517.69-8517.70

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within heading 85.17, whether or not there is also a
change from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of heading 85.17 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

85.18

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction

654

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

value or ex-works price of the product.
85.19-85.21

A change from any other heading, except heading 85.22; or
A change from 85.22, whether or not there is also a change from any
other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials
classified in heading 85.22 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

85.22

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

85.23

A change from any other heading.

85.25

A change from within this heading or any other heading, provided that the
value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 40 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

85.26-85.28

A change from any other heading, except from heading 85.29; or
A change from heading 85.29, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of
heading 85.29 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

85.29

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

8530.10-8530.90

A change from any other subheading.

85.31

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change

655

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.
8532.10-8534.00

A change from any other subheading.

85.35-85.37

A change from any other heading, except from heading 85.38; or
A change from heading 85.38, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials
classified in heading 85.38 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

85.38-85.48

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Section XVII

Vehicles, Aircraft, Vessels and Associated Transport Equipment

Chapter 86

Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof;
railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts thereof;
mechanical (including electro-mechanical) traffic signalling
equipment of all kinds

86.01-86.06

A change from any other heading, except from heading 86.07; or
A change from heading 86.07, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of
heading 86.07 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

86.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

656

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

86.08-86.09

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 87

Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling-stock, and parts and
accessories thereof

87.01

Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does
not exceed 45 per cent of the ex-works price or transaction value of the
product. 66

87.02

Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does
not exceed 45 per cent of the ex-works price or transaction value of the
product.67

87.03

Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does
not exceed 50 per cent of the ex-works price or transaction value of the
product.68

87.04

Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does
not exceed 45 per cent of the ex-works price or transaction value of the
product.69

87.05

Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does
not exceed 45 per cent of the ex-works price or transaction value of the
product. 70

66

67
68

69

The Parties agree to apply cumulation with the United States according to the following provisions:
Provided that there is a Free Trade Agreement in force between each Party and the United States consistent with the Parties’
WTO obligations and the Parties reach agreement on all the applicable conditions, any material of Chapter 84, 85, 87 or 94 of the
Harmonized System originating in the United States used in the production of this product in Canada or the European Union will
be considered as originating. Without prejudice to the outcome of the free trade negotiations between the European Union and the
United States, the discussions on the applicable conditions will include consultations to ensure consistency between the
calculation method agreed between the European Union and the United States and the method applicable under this Agreement
for this product, if necessary.
Accordingly the above rule of origin will cease to apply one year following the entry into application of such cumulation and the
following rule of origin shall apply instead:
Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does not exceed 40per cent of the ex-works price or
transaction value of the product.
The application of cumulation and of the new rule of origin will be published in the European Union Official Journal for
information purposes.
See footnote 3.
This rule of origin will cease to apply seven years after the entry into force of this Agreement. The following rule of origin shall
apply instead:
Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does not exceed 45 per cent of the ex-works price or
transaction value of the product.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, and subject to any applicable conditions agreed upon by the Parties, the following rule of origin
shall apply when the cumulation provided for in Annex 5-A: Section D – Vehicles, Note 1 enters into application:
Production in which the value of all non-originating materials used does not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price or
transaction value of the product.
See footnote 3.

657

Harmonized
System
classification
87.06

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from any other heading, except from heading 84.07, 84.08 or
87.08; or
A change from within this heading, heading 84.07, 84.08 or 87.08,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of non-originating materials of this heading or heading
84.07, 84.08 or 87.08 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value
or ex-works price of the product.

87.07

A change from any other heading, except from heading 87.08; or
A change from within this heading or heading 87.08, whether or not there
is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of this heading or heading 87.08 does not exceed 50
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

87.08

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

87.09

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

87.10-87.11

A change from any other heading.

87.12

A change from any other heading, except from 87.14; or
A change from heading 87.14, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of
heading 87.14 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

70

See footnote 3.

658

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

87.13

A change from any other heading.

87.14-87.16

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is a
change from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials classified in the same heading as the final product does not
exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
product.

Chapter 88

Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof

88.01

A change from any other heading.

88.02-88.05

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Chapter 89

Ships, boats and floating structures

89.01-89.06

A change from any other chapter; or
A change from within this chapter, whether or not there is also a change
from any other chapter, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of Chapter 89 does not exceed 40 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

89.07-89.08

A change from any other heading.

Section XVIII

Optical, Photographic, Cinematographic, Measuring, Checking,
Precision, Medical or Surgical Instruments and Apparatus; Clocks
and Watches; Musical Instruments; Parts and Accessories Thereof

Chapter 90

Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking,
precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus; parts and
accessories thereof

659

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

90.01

A change from any other heading.

90.02

A change from any other heading, except from heading 90.01; or
A change from within this heading or heading 90.01, whether or not there
is also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of this heading or heading 90.01 does not exceed 50
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

90.03-90.33

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Chapter 91

Clocks and watches and parts thereof

91.01-91.07

A change from any other heading, except from heading 91.08 through
91.14; or
A change from heading 91.08 through 91.14, whether or not there is also
a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials of heading 91.08 through 91.14 does not exceed 50
per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

91.08-91.14

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Chapter 92

Musical instruments; parts and accessories of such articles

92.01-92.08

A change from any other heading, except from heading 92.09; or
A change from heading 92.09, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of

660

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

heading 92.09 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.
92.09

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

Section XIX

Arms and Ammunition; Parts and Accessories Thereof

Chapter 93

Arms and ammunition; parts and accessories thereof

93.01-93.04

A change from any other heading, except from heading 93.05; or
A change from heading 93.05, whether or not there is also a change from
any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating materials of
heading 93.05 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

93.05-93.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

Section XX

Miscellaneous Manufactured Articles

Chapter 94

Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and
similar stuffed furnishings; lamps and lighting fittings, not elsewhere
specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and
the like; prefabricated buildings

94.01-94.06

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product

661

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.
Chapter 95

Toys, games and sports requisites; parts and accessories thereof

95.03-95.05

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

9506.11-9506.29

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading, whether or not there is also a change from any other heading,
provided that the value of non-originating materials classified in the same
subheading as the final product does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

9506.31

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 9506.39, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of subheading 9506.39 does not exceed 50 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

9506.32-9506.99

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other
subheading, whether or not there is also a change from any other
subheading, provided that the value of non-originating materials classified
in the same subheading as the final product does not exceed 50 per cent of
the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.

95.07-95.08

A change from any other heading.

Chapter 96

Miscellaneous manufactured articles

9601.10-9602.00

A change from within any one of these subheadings or any other

662

Harmonized
System
classification

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

subheading.
96.03-96.04

A change from any other heading.

96.05

A change from any other heading, provided that the value of the nonoriginating component products does not exceed 25 per cent of the
transaction value or ex-works price of the set.

96.06-96.07

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within any one of these headings, whether or not there is
also a change from any other heading, provided that the value of nonoriginating materials classified in the same heading as the final product
does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of
the product.

9608.10-9608.40

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, except from subheading 9608.50,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of non-originating materials of this heading other than
subheading 9608.50 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value
or ex-works price of the product.

9608.50

A change from any other heading; or
A change from subheading 9608.10 through 9608.40 or 9608.60 through
9608.99, whether or not there is also a change from any other heading,
provided that the value of the non-originating component products of
subheading 9608.10 through 9608.40 or 9608.60 through 9608.99 does
not exceed 25 per cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the
set.

9608.60-9608.99

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, except from subheading 9608.50,
whether or not there is also a change from any other heading, provided
that the value of non-originating materials of this heading other than
subheading 9608.50 does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction value
or ex-works price of the product.

663

Harmonized
System
classification
96.09

Product specific rule for sufficient production pursuant to Article 5

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

96.10-96.12

A change from any other heading.

96.13

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

96.14

A change from within this heading or any other heading.

96.15

A change from any other heading; or
A change from within this heading, whether or not there is also a change
from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading does not exceed 50 per cent of the transaction
value or ex-works price of the product.

96.16-96.18

A change from any other heading.

96.19

A change from any other heading.

Section XXI

Works of Art, Collectors’ Pieces and Antiques

Chapter 97

Works of art, collectors' pieces and antiques

97.01-97.06

A change from any other heading.

664

ANNEX 5-A
ORIGIN QUOTAS AND ALTERNATIVES TO THE PRODUCT-SPECIFIC RULES
OF ORIGIN IN ANNEX 5
Common Provisions
1.

Annex 5-A applies to the products identified in the following Sections:
(a)

Section A: Agricultural Products

(b)

Section B: Fish and Seafood

(c)

Section C: Textiles and Apparel

(d)

Section D: Vehicles

2.

For the products listed in the tables within each Section, the corresponding rules of
origin are alternatives to those set out in Annex 5 – Product-Specific Rules of Origin,
within the limits of the applicable annual quota.

3.

The importing Party shall manage the origin quotas on a first-come first-served basis
and shall calculate the quantity of products entered under these origin quotas on the
basis of that Party’s imports.

4.

All exports under the origin quotas must make reference to Annex 5-A. The Parties
shall not count any products against the annual origin quota without such reference.

5.

Canada shall notify the European Union if any Canadian-issued documentation
requirements are established for:
(a)

products exported from Canada under the applicable origin quota; or

(b)

products imported into Canada under the applicable origin quota.

6.

If the European Union receives notification pursuant to paragraph 5(a), the European
Union shall allow for only those products accompanied by such documentation to
claim the preferential tariff treatment based on the alternative rule of origin specified
in Annex 5-A.

7.

The Parties shall administer the origin quotas on a calendar year basis with the full
in-quota quantity to be made available on January 1st of each year. For the
administration of these origin quotas in Year 1, the Parties shall calculate the quota
volumes of these origin quotas by discounting the volume corresponding to the
period running between the 1st of January and the date of entry into force of the
Agreement.

8.

With respect to the European Union, any quantities referred to in this Annex shall be
managed by the European Commission, which shall take all administrative actions it
deems advisable for their efficient management in respect of the applicable
legislation of the European Union.

9.

The Parties shall consult as needed to ensure that Annex 5-A is administered
effectively and shall cooperate in the administration of Annex 5-A. The Parties shall
consult to discuss possible modifications to Annex 5-A.

10.

Additional provisions, such as review or growth of the origin quotas, are provided
separately for each Section.
665

Section A – Agriculture
Table A.1 – Annual Quota Allocation for High-Sugar Containing71 Products Exported from
Canada to the European Union72

Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

Sufficient production

ex 1302.20

Pectic substances, pectinates
and pectates, containing
added sugar of subheading
1701.91 through 1701.99

A change from within this
subheading or any other
subheading, except from
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99.

ex 1806.10

Cocoa powder, containing
added sugar of subheading
1701.91 through 1701.99

A change from any other
subheading, except from
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99.

ex 1806.20

Preparations containing
added sugar of subheading
1701.91 through 1701.99 for
the preparation of chocolate
beverages

A change from within this
subheading or any other
subheading, except from
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99.

ex 2101.12

Preparations with a basis of
extracts, essences or
concentrates of coffee or with
a basis of coffee containing
added sugar of subheading
1701.91 through 1701.99

A change from any other
subheading, except from
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99.

ex 2101.20

Preparations with a basis of
extracts, essences or
concentrates of tea or maté,
or with a basis of tea or maté
containing added sugar of
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99

A change from within this
subheading or any other
subheading, except from
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99.

ex 2106.90

Food preparations containing
added sugar of subheading
1701.91 through 1701.99

A change from within this
subheading or any other
subheading, except from

71
72

Annual quota
for exports from
Canada into the
European Union
(metric tonnes,
net weight)

30,000

The products, to which Table A.1 applies, must contain 65 per cent or more by net weight of added cane or beet sugar of
subheading 1701.91 through 1701.99. All the cane or beet sugar must have been refined in Canada.
With regard to the products to which Table A.1 applies, it is understood that the sufficient production included in this column
provides for production beyond the insufficient production provided in Article 7.

666

subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99.
Review and Growth Provisions Related to Table A.1
1.

The Parties shall review the origin quota level at the end of every five year period for
the first three consecutive five year periods following the entry into force of this
Agreement.

2.

At the end of each five year period for the first three consecutive five year periods
following the entry into force of this Agreement, the origin quota volume in Table
A.1 will be increased by 20 per cent of the volume set in the previous period,
provided that:
(a)

in any one year during the first five year period the fill-rate is at least 60 per
cent;

(b)

in any one year during the second five year period the fill-rate is at least 70 per
cent; and

(c)

in any one year during the third five year period the fill-rate is at least 80 per
cent.

3.

Any increase in the origin quota volume will be implemented in the first quarter of
the subsequent calendar year.

4.

This review will be conducted by the Committee on Agriculture. At the end of the
review, if applicable, the Parties shall notify each other in writing of an increase in
the origin quota under paragraph 2 and the date on which the increase applies under
paragraph 3. The Parties shall ensure that an increase in the origin quota and the date
it becomes applicable are publicly available.

667

Table A.2 – Annual Quota Allocation for Sugar Confectionery and Chocolate Preparations
Exported from Canada to the European Union

Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

Sufficient production

17.04

Sugar confectionery
(including white chocolate),
not containing cocoa

1806.31

Chocolate and other food
preparations containing
cocoa, in blocks, slabs or
bars, filled, weighing no more
than 2 kilograms

1806.32

Chocolate and other food
preparations containing
cocoa, in blocks, slabs or
bars, not filled, weighing no
more than 2 kilograms

1806.90

Chocolate and other food
preparations containing cocoa
other than those of
subheading 1806.10 through
1806.32

Annual quota
for exports from
Canada into the
European Union
(metric tonnes,
net weight)

A change from any other
heading.

A change from any other
subheading, provided that the
change is the result of more than
packaging.

10,000

Review and Growth Provisions Related to Table A.2
1.

The Parties shall review the origin quota in Table A.2 at the end of every five year
period following the entry into force of this Agreement, provided that in any one year
during the previous 5 year period, the origin quota fill-rate is at least 60 per cent.

2.

The review will be conducted with a view to increasing the volume based on the
examination of all relevant factors, in particular the fill rate, growth in Canadian
exports to the world, growth in total European Union imports, and any other
significant trends in trade of the products to which the origin quota applies.

3.

The rate of increase in the origin quota will be established for the subsequent period
of five years, and will not be greater than 10 per cent of the volume set in the
previous period.

4.

This review will be conducted by the Committee on Agriculture. Any
recommendation of the Committee on Agriculture to increase the origin quota
volume shall be submitted to the CETA Joint Committee for a decision in accordance
with Article 30.2.2.

668

Table A.3 – Annual Quota Allocation for Processed Foods Exported from Canada to the
European Union

Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

Sufficient production

19.01

Malt extract; food
preparations of flour, groats,
meal, starch or malt extract,
not containing cocoa or
containing less than 40 per
cent by weight of cocoa
calculated on a totally
defatted basis, not elsewhere
specified or included; food
preparations of goods of
heading 04.01 through 04.04,
not containing cocoa or
containing less than 5 per
cent by weight of cocoa
calculated on a totally
defatted basis, not elsewhere
specified or included

ex 1902.11

Uncooked pasta, not stuffed
or otherwise prepared,
containing eggs and rice

ex 1902.19

Uncooked pasta, not stuffed
or otherwise prepared, other,
containing rice

ex 1902.20

Stuffed pasta, whether or not
cooked or otherwise
prepared, containing rice

ex 1902.30

Other pasta, containing rice

1904.10

Prepared foods obtained by
the swelling or roasting of
cereals or cereal products (for
example, corn flakes)

1904.20

Annual quota
for exports from
Canada into the
European Union
(metric tonnes
net weight)

A change from any other
heading.

35,000

A change from any other
heading.

Prepared foods obtained from
unroasted cereal flakes or
from mixtures of unroasted

A change from any other
heading; or
A change from within this

669

cereal flakes and roasted
cereal flakes or swelled
cereals

heading, whether or not there is
also a change from any other
heading, provided that the
weight of the non-originating
materials of this heading does
not exceed 30 per cent of either
the net weight of the product or
the net weight of all material
used in production.

1904.90

Prepared foods other than
those of subheading 1904.10
through 1904.30

19.05

Bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits
and other bakers’ wares,
whether or not containing
cocoa; communion wafers,
A change from any other
empty cachets of a kind
heading.
suitable for pharmaceutical
use, sealing wafers, rice paper
and similar products

2009.81

Cranberry juice

ex 2009.89

Cranberry juice and blueberry A change from any other
juice
heading.

2103.90

Other sauces and preparations
therefor, other mixed
A change from any other
condiments and mixed
heading.
seasonings

ex 2106.10

Protein concentrates and
textured protein substances,
not containing added sugar of
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99 or containing less
than 65 per cent by net
weight of added sugar of
subheading 1701.91 through
1701.99

ex 2106.90

Other food preparations not
elsewhere specified or
included, not containing
added sugar of subheading
1701.91 through 1701.99 or

A change from any other
heading.

A change from any other
heading.

A change from any other
subheading; or
A change from within the same
subheading, whether or not there
is also a change from any other
subheading, provided that the
net weight of non-originating
material from within that
subheading does not exceed 30
per cent of either the net weight
of the product or the net weight
of all material used in
production.

670

containing less than 65 per
cent by net weight of added
sugar of subheading 1701.91
through 1701.99
Review and Growth Provisions Related to Table A.3
1.

The Parties shall review the origin quota in Table A.3 at the end of every five year
period following the entry into force of this Agreement, provided that in any one year
during the previous five year period, the origin quota fill-rate is at least 60 per cent.

2.

The review will be conducted with a view to increasing the volume based on the
examination of all relevant factors, in particular the fill-rate, growth in Canadian
exports to the world, growth in total European Union imports, and any other
significant trends in trade of the products to which the origin quota applies.

3.

The rate of increase in the origin quota will be established for the subsequent period
of five years, and will not be greater than 10 per cent of the volume set in the
previous period.

4.

This review will be conducted by the Committee on Agriculture. Any
recommendation of the Committee on Agriculture to increase the origin quota
volume shall be submitted to the CETA Joint Committee for a decision in accordance
with Article 30.2.2.

Table A.4 – Annual Quota Allocation for Dog and Cat Food Exported from Canada to the
European Union

Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

2309.10

ex 2309.90

Sufficient production

Dog or cat food, put up for
retail sale

A change from subheading
2309.90 or any other heading,
except from dog or cat food of
subheading 2309.90.

Dog or cat food, not put up
for retail sale

A change from within this
subheading or any other
heading, except from dog or cat
food from within this
subheading.

671

Annual quota
for exports from
Canada into the
European Union
(metric tonnes,
net weight)

60,000

Review and Growth Provisions Related to Table A.4
1.

The Parties shall review the origin quota in Table A.4 at the end of every five year
period following the entry into force of this Agreement, provided that in any one year
during the previous five year period, the origin quota fill-rate is at least 60 per cent.

2.

The review will be conducted with a view to increasing the volume based on the
examination of all relevant factors, in particular the fill-rate, growth in Canadian
exports to the world, growth in total European Union imports, and any other
significant trends in trade of the products to which the origin quota applies.

3.

The rate of increase in the origin quota will be established for the subsequent period
of five years, and will not be greater than 10 per cent of the volume set in the
previous period.

4.

This review will be conducted by the Committee on Agriculture. Any
recommendation of the Committee on Agriculture to increase the origin quota
volume shall be submitted to the CETA Joint Committee for a decision in accordance
with Article 30.2.2.

Section B – Fish and Seafood
Table B.1 – Annual Quota Allocation for Fish and Seafood Exported from Canada to the
European Union

672

Annual quota
for exports
from Canada
into the
Sufficient production
European
Union (metric
tonnes, net
weight)

Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

ex 0304.83

Frozen fillets of halibut, other than
Reinhardtius hippoglossoides

10

A change from any other
heading.73

ex 0306.12

Cooked and frozen lobster

2,000

A change from any other
subheading.

1604.11

Prepared or preserved salmon

3,000

1604.12

Prepared or preserved herring

50

ex 1604.13

Prepared or preserved sardines, sardinella and
brisling or sprats, excluding Sardina
pilchardus

200

ex 1605.10

Prepared or preserved crab, other than
Cancer pagurus

44

1605.211605.29

Prepared or preserved shrimps and prawns

1605.30

Prepared and preserved lobster

A change from any other
chapter.

5,000
240

Growth Provisions Related to Table B.1
1.

For each of the products listed in Table B.1, if more than 80 per cent of an origin
quota assigned to a product is used during a calendar year, the origin quota allocation
will be increased for the following calendar year. The increase will be 10 per cent of
the origin quota assigned to the product in the previous calendar year. The growth
provision will apply for the first time after the expiry of the first complete calendar
year following the entry into force of the Agreement and will be applied for four
consecutive years in total.

2.

Any increase in the origin quota volume will be implemented in the first quarter of
the subsequent calendar year. The importing Party shall notify the Party of export in
writing if the condition in paragraph 1 is met, and if so, the increase in the origin
quota and the date on which the increase is applicable. The Parties shall ensure that
the increased origin quota and the date on which it becomes applicable are publicly
available.

73

With regard to the rule of origin for products of subheading 0304.83, it is understood that the production is beyond the insufficient
production provided in Article 7.

673

674

Review Provision Related to Table B.1
After the completion of the third calendar year following the entry into force of this
Agreement, at the request of a Party, the Parties will engage in a discussion on possible
revisions to this Section.
Section C – Textiles and Apparel
Table C.1 – Annual Quota Allocation for Textiles Exported from Canada to the European
Union
Annual
quota for
exports
from
Canada into
the
European
Union
(kilograms
net weight,
unless
otherwise
specified)

Harmonized
System
Product description
classification

Sufficient production

5107.20

Yarn of combed wool, not put up for
retail sale, containing less than 85
per cent by weight of wool

192,000

A change from any other
heading.

5205.12

Cotton yarn not elsewhere specified
or included, 85 per cent or more by
weight of cotton, not put up for
retail sale, single uncombed yarn,
over 14 nm but not over 43 nm

1,176,000

A change from any other
heading.

5208.59

Woven fabrics of cotton, 85 per cent
or more cotton by weight, printed,
other than plain weave, not
elsewhere specified or included,
weighing not over 200 g/m2

60,000 m²

5209.59

Woven fabrics of cotton, 85 per cent
or more cotton by weight, printed,
other than plain weave, not
elsewhere specified or included,
weighing over 200 g/m2

79,000 m²

54.02

Synthetic filament yarn (other than
sewing thread), not put up for retail
sale, including synthetic
monofilaments of less than 67
decitex

4,002,000

675

A change from any other
heading.

A change from any other
heading.

5404.19

Synthetic monofilament of 67
decitex or more and of which no
cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1
mm, not elsewhere specified or
included

21,000

A change from any other
heading; or
Printing or dyeing,
accompanied by at least two
preparatory or finishing
operations (such as scouring,
bleaching, mercerizing, heat
4,838,000 m² setting, raising, calendering,
shrink resistance processing,
permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and
burling), provided that the value
of the non-originating fabric
does not exceed 47.5 per cent of
the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

54.07

Woven fabrics of synthetic filament
yarn, including woven fabrics
obtained from materials of heading
54.04

5505.10

Waste (including noils, yarn waste
and garnetted stock), of synthetic
fibres

5513.11

Woven fabrics of polyester staple
fibres, under 85 per cent (wt.) Of
such fibres, unbleached or bleached,
plain weave, mixed mainly or solely
with cotton, not over 170 g/m2

56.02

Felt, whether or not impregnated,
coated, covered or laminated

583,000

56.03

Nonwovens (of textile materials),
whether or not impregnated, coated,
covered or laminated

621,000

57.03

Carpets and other textile floor
coverings, tufted, whether or not
made-up

58.06

Narrow woven fabrics, other than
goods of heading 58.07 (other than
labels, badges and similar articles,
in the piece etc.); narrow fabrics
consisting of warp without weft
assembled by means of an adhesive

676

1,025,000

A change from any other
heading.

6,259,000 m²

A change from any other
heading.

A change from any other
chapter.

196,000 m²

169,000

A change from any other
heading.

5811.00

Quilted textile products in the piece
(one or more layers assembled with
padding by stitching etc.), other than
embroidery of heading 58.10

12,000 m²

59.03

Textile fabrics impregnated, coated,
covered or laminated with plastics,
other than those of heading 59.02

1,754,000 m²

5904.90

Floor coverings, consisting of a
coating or covering applied on a
textile backing, whether or not cut
to shape, excluding linoleum

24,000 m²

59.06

Rubberized textile fabrics, other
than those of heading 59.02

450,000

5907.00

Textile fabrics otherwise
impregnated, coated or covered;
painted canvas being theatrical
scenery, studio back-cloths or the
like

2,969,000 m²

59.11

Textile products and articles for
specified technical uses

60.04

Knitted or crocheted fabrics of a
width exceeding 30 cm, containing
by weight 5 per cent or more
elastomeric yarn or rubber thread,
other than those of heading 60.01

25,000

60.05

Warp knit fabrics (including those
made on galloon knitting machines),
other than those of heading 60.01 to
60.04

16,000

60.06

Knitted or crocheted fabrics, not
elsewhere specified or included

24,000

63.06

Tarpaulins, awnings, sunblinds,
tents, sails for boats, sailboards or
landcraft, and camping goods, of
textile materials

124,000

Made-up articles of textile
materials, not elsewhere specified or
included

503,000

63.07

677

A change from any other
heading.

A change from any other
chapter, provided that the value
of the non-originating fabric
does not exceed 60 per cent of
the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

173,000
A change from any other
heading; or
Printing or dyeing,
accompanied by at least two
preparatory or finishing
operations (such as scouring,
bleaching, mercerizing, heat
setting, raising, calendering,
shrink resistance processing,
permanent finishing, decatising,
impregnating, mending and
burling), provided that the value
of the non-originating fabric
does not exceed 47.5 per cent of
the transaction value or exworks price of the product.

A change from any other
chapter.

m2 = metres squared

678

Table C.2 – Annual Quota Allocation for Apparel Exported from Canada to the European
Union
Annual quota
for exports
from Canada
into the
European
Union (units,
unless
otherwise
specified)

Harmonized
System
Product description
classification

6101.30

Men’s or boys' overcoats, car coats, capes,
cloaks, anoraks, ski-jackets, and similar
articles of manmade fibres, knitted or
crocheted

10,000

6102.30

Women's or girls' overcoats, car coats,
capes, cloaks, anoraks, ski-jackets and
similar articles of manmade fibres, knitted
or crocheted

17,000

61.04

Women's or girls' suits, ensembles, suittype jackets, blazers, dresses, skirts,
divided skirts, trousers, etc. (no
swimwear), knitted or crocheted

535,000

6106.20

Women's or girls' blouses and shirts of
manmade fibres, knitted or crocheted

44,000

6108.22

Women's or girls' briefs and panties of
manmade fibres, knitted or crocheted

129,000

6108.92

Women's or girls' negligees, bathrobes,
dressing gowns and similar articles of
manmade fibres, knitted or crocheted

39,000

6109.10

T-shirts, singlets and other vests, of
cotton, knitted or crocheted

342,000

6109.90

T-shirts, singlets and other vests, of textile
materials not elsewhere specified or
included, knitted or crocheted

181,000

61.10

Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats
and similar articles, knitted or crocheted

478,000

6112.41

Women's or girls' swimwear of synthetic
fibres, knitted or crocheted

73,000

74

Sufficient
production74

A change from any
other chapter,
provided that the
product is both cut (or
knit to shape) and
sewn or otherwise
assembled in the
territory of a Party; or
A change to a good
knit to shape, for
which no sewing or
other assembly is
required, from any
other chapter.

With regard to the products to which Table C.2 applies, it is understood that the sufficient production included in this column
provides for production beyond the insufficient production provided for in Article 7.

679

61.14

Garments not elsewhere specified or
included, knitted or crocheted

90,000
kilograms

61.15

Pantyhose, tights, stockings, socks and
other hosiery, including graduated
compression hosiery (for example
stockings for varicose veins) and footwear
without applied soles, knitted or crocheted

98,000
kilograms

62.01

Men's or boys' overcoats car coats, capes,
cloaks, anoraks (including ski-jackets),
windcheaters, wind-jackets and similar
articles, not knitted or crocheted, other
than those of heading 6203

96,000

62.02

Women's or girls' overcoats, car coats,
capes, cloaks, anoraks (including skijackets), windcheaters, wind-jackets and
similar articles, not knitted or crocheted,
other than those of heading 6204

99,000

62.03

Men's or boys' suits, ensembles, jackets,
blazers, trousers, bib and brace overalls,
breeches and shorts (other than
swimwear), not knitted or crocheted

95,000

62.04

Women's or girls' suits, ensembles,
jackets, blazers, dresses, skirts, divided
skirts, trousers, bib and brace overalls,
breeches and shorts (other than
swimwear), not knitted or crocheted

506,000

62.05

Men's or boys' shirts, not knitted or
crocheted

15,000

62.06

Women's or girls’ blouses, shirts and shirtblouses, not knitted or crocheted

64,000

6210.40

Men's or boys' garments, made up of
fabrics of heading 59.03, 59.06 or 59.07,
not elsewhere specified or included, not
knitted or crocheted

68,000
kilograms

6210.50

Women's or girls' garments, made up of
fabrics of heading 59.03, 59.06 or 59.07,
not elsewhere specified or included, not
knitted or crocheted

30,000
kilograms

62.11

Track suits, ski-suits and swimwear, other
garments not elsewhere specified or
included, not knitted or crocheted

52,000
kilograms

6212.10

Brassieres, whether or not knitted or
crocheted
680

297,000

6212.20

Girdles and panty girdles, whether or not
knitted or crocheted

32,000

6212.30

Corselettes, whether or not knitted or
crocheted

40,000

6212.90

Braces, suspenders, garters and similar
articles and parts thereof, whether or not
knitted or crocheted

681

16,000
kilograms

Table C.3 – Annual Quota Allocation for Textiles Exported from the European Union to
Canada
Annual quota
for exports from
the European
Union into
Canada
(kilograms,
unless otherwise
specified)

Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

Sufficient production

5007.20

Woven fabrics containing 85
per cent or more by weight of
silk or of silk waste other than
noil silk

83,000 m2

Weaving.

5111.30

Woven fabrics containing
predominantly, but less than 85
per cent by weight of carded
wool or carded fine animal
hair, mixed mainly or solely
with man-made staple fibres

205,000 m2

Weaving.

51.12

Woven fabrics of combed wool
or of combed fine animal hair

200,000

Weaving.

5208.39

Woven fabrics of cotton,
containing 85 per cent or more
cotton by weight and weighing
not more than 200 g/m², dyed,
excluding those in three-thread
or four-thread twill, which
includes cross twill, and plain
woven fabrics

116,000 m2

Weaving.

5401.10

Sewing thread of synthetic
filaments, whether or not put
up for retail sale

18,000

Extrusion of man-made
filament yarn whether or not
accompanied by spinning; or
Spinning.

5402.11

Synthetic filament yarn, not
put up for retail sale, high
tenacity yarn of aramids

504,000

Extrusion of man-made
filament yarn whether or not
accompanied by spinning; or
Spinning.

54.04

Synthetic monofilament of 67
decitex or more and with a
682

275,000

Extrusion of man-made
filament yarn whether or not

cross sectional dimension of no
more than 1 mm; strip and the
like, (for example, artificial
straw), of synthetic textile
material, with an apparent
width of no more than 5 mm

accompanied by spinning; or
Spinning.

54.07

Woven fabrics of synthetic
filament yarn, including woven
fabrics obtained from materials
of heading 5404

56.03

Nonwovens, whether or not
impregnated, coated, covered
or laminated, not elsewhere
specified or included

1,629,000

Any non-woven process
including needle punching.

5607.41

Binder or baler twine, of
polyethylene or polypropylene

813,000

Any non-woven process
including needle punching.

5607.49

Twine, cordage, ropes and
cables of polyethylene or
polypropylene, whether or not
plaited or braided and whether
or not impregnated, coated,
covered or sheathed with
rubber or plastics (excluding
binder or baler twine)

347,000

Any non-woven process
including needle punching.

5702.42

Carpets and other floor
coverings, of man-made textile
materials, woven, not tufted or
flocked, of pile construction,
made up (excluding kelem,
schumacks, karamanie and
similar hand-woven rugs)

5703.20

Carpets and other floor
coverings, of nylon or other
polyamides, tufted whether or
not made up

5704.90

Carpets and other floor
coverings, of felt, not tufted or
flocked, whether or not madeup (excluding floor tiles with
an area of no more than 0,3 m²

59.03

Textile fabrics impregnated,
coated, covered or laminated
with plastics (excluding tyre
cord fabric of high-tenacity

636,000

Weaving.

Weaving; or
187,000 m2

Use of any non-woven process
including needle punching.
Weaving; or

413,000 m2

Use of any non-woven process
including needle punching.
Weaving; or

1,830,000

Use of any non-woven process
including needle punching.
Weaving; or

209,000
Coating, flocking, laminating
683

yarn of nylon or other
polyamides, polyesters or
viscose rayon)

or metalising, in each case
accompanied by at least two
other main preparatory
finishing operations (such as
calendering, shrinking
resistance processing) confer
origin provided that at least
52.5 per cent value was added
based on ex-work price of
product
Weaving; or

5904.10

Linoleum, whether or not cut
to shape

61,000 m2

Coating, flocking, laminating
or metalizing, in each case
accompanied by at least two
other main preparatory
finishing operations (such as
calendering, shrinking
resistance processing) confer
origin provided that at least
52.5 per cent value was added
based on ex-work price of
product.
Manufacturing from yarn or
waste fabrics or rags of
headings 6310;
Weaving; or

5910.00

Transmission or conveyor belts
or belting, of textile material,
whether or not impregnated,
coated, covered or laminated
with plastics, or reinforced
with metal or other material

59.11

Textile products and articles,
for technical uses, specified in
note 7 to chapter 59

684

298,000

160,000

Coating, flocking, laminating
or metalising, in each case
accompanied by at least two
other main preparatory
finishing operations (such as
calendering, shrinking
resistance processing) confer
origin provided that at least
52.5 per cent value was added
based on ex-work price of
product.
Manufacturing from yarn or
waste fabrics or rags of
headings 6310;

Weaving; or
Coating, flocking, laminating
or metalising, in each case
accompanied by at least two
other main preparatory
finishing operations (such as
calendering, shrinking
resistance processing) confer
origin provided that at least
52.5 per cent value was added
based on ex-work price of
product.
Cutting of fabric and making
up; or
6302.21

Bed linen, printed, of cotton,
not knitted or crocheted

176,000

Use of any non-woven process
including needle punching
accompanied by making up
(including cutting).
Cutting of fabric and making
up;

6302.31

Bed linen (other than printed)
of cotton, not knitted or
crocheted

216,000

Use of any non-woven process
including needle punching
accompanied by making up
(including cutting);or
Making up preceded by
printing.

6302.91

Toilet linen and kitchen linen
of cotton (excluding of terry
towelling or similar terry
fabrics) floor-cloths, polishingcloths, dish-cloths and dusters

Use of any non-woven process
including needle punching
accompanied by making
up(including cutting);
20,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up; or
Making up preceded by
printing.

685

686

Table C.4 – Annual Quota Allocation for Apparel Exported from the European Union to
Canada
Annual
quota for
exports from
the
European
Sufficient production75
Union into
Canada
(units,
unless
otherwise
specified)

Harmonized
System
Product description
classification

6105.10

Men's or boys' shirts of cotton,
knitted or crocheted (excluding
nightshirts, t-shirts, singlets and
other vests)

46,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

61.06

Women's or girls' blouses, shirts
and shirt-blouses, knitted or
crocheted (excluding t-shirts and
vests)

126,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

61.09

T-shirts, singlets and other vests,
knitted or crocheted

722,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

61.10

Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans,
waistcoats and similar articles,
knitted or crocheted (excluding
wadded waistcoats)

61.14

Other garments not elsewhere
specified or included, knitted or
crocheted

6115

Pantyhose, tights, stockings, socks
and other hosiery, including
graduated compression hosiery
(for example, stockings for
varicose veins) and footwear

75

Cutting of fabric and making
up; or
537,000

Knitting to shape for products
for which no sewing or other
assembly is required.
Cutting of fabric and making
up; or

58,000
kilograms

1,691,000
pairs

Knitting to shape for products
for which no sewing or other
assembly is required.
Cutting of fabric and making
up; or
Knitting to shape for products

With regard to the products to which Table C.4 applies, it is understood that the sufficient production included in this column
provides for production beyond the insufficient production provided for in Article 7.

687

without applied soles, knitted or
crocheted (excluding for babies)

for which no sewing or other
assembly is required.

6202.11

Women's or girls' overcoats,
raincoats, carcoats, capes, cloaks
and similar articles of wool or fine
animal hair, not knitted or
crocheted

15,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

6202.93

Women's or girls' anoraks,
windcheaters, wind jackets and
similar articles, of man-made
fibres (not knitted or crocheted)

16,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

6203.11

Men's or boys' suits of wool or fine
animal hair

39,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

6203.126203.49

Men's or boys' suits (excluding
wool or fine animal hair),
ensembles, jackets, blazers,
trousers, bib and brace overalls,
breeches and shorts (excluding
knitted or crocheted, and
swimwear)

281,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

62.04

Women's or girls' suits, ensembles,
jackets, blazers, dresses, skirts,
divided skirts, trousers, bib and
brace overalls, breeches and shorts
(excluding knitted or crocheted
and swimwear)

537,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

6205.20

Men's or boys' shirts of cotton, not
knitted or crocheted

182,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

62.10

Garments made up of fabrics of
heading 5602, 5603, 5903, 5906 or
5907 (excluding knitted or
crocheted, and babies’ garments)

19,000

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

62.11

Tracksuits, ski suits, swimwear
and other garments, not elsewhere
specified (excluding knitted or
crocheted)

85,000
kilograms

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

62.12

Brassieres, girdles, corsets, braces,
suspenders, garters and similar
articles and parts thereof, of all
types of textile materials, whether
or not elasticated, including knitted
or crocheted (excluding belts and
corselets made entirely of rubber)

26,000
dozens

Cutting of fabric and making
up.

688

689

Growth Provisions Related to Tables C.1, C.2, C.3 and C.4
1.

For each of the products listed in Tables C.1, C.2, C.3 and C.4, if more than 80 per
cent of an origin quota assigned to a product is used during a calendar year, the
origin quota allocation will be increased for the following calendar year. The
increase will be 3 per cent of the origin quota assigned to the product in the previous
calendar year. The growth provision will apply for the first time after the expiry of
the first complete calendar year following the entry into force of the Agreement. The
annual origin quota allocations may be increased during a period of up to ten years.

2.

Any increase in the origin quota volume will be implemented in the first quarter of
the subsequent calendar year. The importing Party shall notify the Party of export in
writing if the condition in paragraph 1 is met, and if so, the increase in the origin
quota and the date on which the increase is applicable. The Parties shall ensure that
the increased origin quota and the date on which it becomes applicable are publicly
available.

Review Provision Related to Tables C.1, C.2, C.3 and C4
At the request of a Party, the Parties shall meet to revise the product coverage quantities of the
quota allocations based on developments in the relevant markets and sectors. The Parties may
recommend revisions to the Committee on Trade in Goods.
Section D – Vehicles
Table D.1 – Annual Quota Allocation for Vehicles Exported from Canada to the European
Union
Harmonize
d System
Product description
classificatio
n

Sufficient
production

8703.21

Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal
combustion reciprocating piston engine: of
a cylinder capacity not exceeding 1,000 cc

8703.22

Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal
combustion reciprocating piston engine: of
a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,000 cc but
not exceeding 1,500 cc

8703.23

Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal
combustion reciprocating piston engine: of
a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but
not exceeding 3,000 cc

8703.24

Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal
combustion reciprocating piston engine: of
a cylinder capacity exceeding 3,000 cc

8703.31

Other vehicles, with compression-ignition
internal combustion piston engine (diesel
or semi-diesel): of a cylinder capacity not
690

Annual quota for
exports from Canada
into the European
Union (units)

Production in
which the
value of all
nonoriginating
materials used
does not
exceed:
100,000
(a) 70 per cent
of the
transaction
value or
ex-works
price of the
product; or
(b) 80 per cent

exceeding 1,500 cc

8703.32

Other vehicles, with compression-ignition
internal combustion piston engine (diesel
or semi-diesel): of a cylinder capacity
exceeding 1,500 cc but not exceeding
2,500 cc

8703.33

Other vehicles, with compression-ignition
internal combustion piston engine (diesel
or semi-diesel): of a cylinder capacity
exceeding 2,500 cc

8703.90

Other

of the net
cost of the
product.

Note 1
The Parties agree to apply cumulation with the United States according to the following
provisions:
Provided that there is a Free Trade Agreement in force between each Party and the United
States consistent with the Parties’ WTO obligations and the Parties reach agreement on all
the applicable conditions, any material of Chapter 84, 85, 87 or 94 of the Harmonized System
originating in the United States used in the production of a product of 8703.21 through
8703.90 of the Harmonized System in Canada or the European Union will be considered as
originating. Without prejudice to the outcome of the free trade negotiations between the
European Union and the United States, the discussions on the applicable conditions will
include consultations to ensure consistency between the calculation method agreed between
the European Union and the United States and the method applicable under this Agreement
for products of Chapter 87, if necessary.
Accordingly Table D.1 will cease to apply one year following the entry into application of
such cumulation.
The application of cumulation and deletion of Note 1 will be published in the European Union
Official Journal for information purposes.
Review Provision
If seven years after entry into force of the Agreement, cumulation with the United States has
not yet entered into force, upon the request of a Party, both Parties shall meet to review these
provisions.
Alternative Product-Specific Rules of Origin for Products of 87.02
For products of heading 87.02 exported from Canada to the European Union, the following
rule of origin applies as an alternative to the rule of origin provided in Annex 5:
A change from any other heading, except from heading 87.06 through 87.08; or
A change from within this heading or heading 87.06 through 87.08, whether or not
there is a change from any other heading, provided that the value of non-originating
materials of this heading or heading 87.06 through 87.08 does not exceed 50 per
cent of the transaction value or ex-works price of the product.
This rule of origin will apply to the enterprises located in Canada and their successors and
assigns producing products of heading 87.02 in Canada, as of the conclusion of negotiations
691

on 1 August 2014.
Note 2
The Parties agree to apply cumulation with the United States according to the following
provisions:
Provided that there is a Free Trade Agreement in force between each Party and the United
States consistent with the Parties’ WTO obligations and the Parties reach agreement on all
the applicable conditions, any material of Chapter 84, 85, 87 or 94 of the Harmonized System
originating in the United States used in the production of a product of 87.02 of the
Harmonized System in Canada or the European Union will be considered as originating.
Accordingly, the alternative Product-Specific Rules of Origin for products of 87.02 will cease
to apply one year following the entry into application of such cumulation.
The application of cumulation and deletion of Note 2 will be published in the European Union
Official Journal for information purposes.

692

ANNEX 6
JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING RULES OF ORIGIN FOR TEXTILES AND
APPAREL
1.

Under this Agreement, trade in textiles and apparel between the Parties is based on
the principle that double transformation confers origin, as reflected in Annex 1
(Product-specific rules of origin) of the Protocol on rules of origin and origin
procedures.

2.

Nevertheless, for a number of reasons, including the absence of a negative
cumulative effect on the producers of the EU, the Parties agree to derogate from
paragraph 1 by providing for limited, reciprocal origin quotas for textiles and
apparel. These origin quotas are expressed in terms of volumes classified by product
category, and includes considering dyeing as equivalent to printing, for a limited and
clearly identified range of product categories.

3.

The Parties affirm that these origin quotas, which are exceptional, will be applied in
strict adherence to the Protocol on rules of origin and origin procedures.

693

ANNEX 7
JOINT DECLARATIONS CONCERNING THE PRINCIPALITY OF ANDORRA
AND THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO
JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE PRINCIPALITY OF ANDORRA
1.

Products originating in the Principality of Andorra falling within Chapters 25 to 97
of the Harmonized System shall be accepted by Canada as originating in the
European Union within the meaning of this Agreement, provided that the customs
union established by Council Decision 90/680/EEC of 26 November 1990 on the
conclusion of an agreement in the form of an exchange of letters between the
European Economic Community and the Principality of Andorra remains in force.

2.

The Protocol on rules of origin and origin procedures shall apply mutatis mutandis
for the purpose of defining the originating status of products referred to in paragraph
1 of this Joint Declaration.
JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO

1.

Products originating in the Republic of San Marino shall be accepted by Canada as
originating in the European Union within the meaning of this Agreement, provided
that these products are covered by the Agreement on Cooperation and Customs
Union between the European Economic Community and the Republic of San Marino,
done at Brussels on 16 December 1991, and that the latter remains in force.

2.

The Protocol on rules of origin and origin procedures shall apply mutatis mutandis
for the purpose of defining the originating status of the products referred to in
paragraph 1 of this Joint Declaration.

694

Protocol on the mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment
Article 1
Definitions
Except as otherwise provided, the definitions contained in Annex 1 to the TBT Agreement
apply to this Protocol. However, the definitions contained in the sixth edition of the ISO/IEC
Guide 2: 1991 General Terms and Their Definitions Concerning Standardization and Related
Activities do not apply to this Protocol. The following additional definitions also apply:
accreditation means third-party attestation related to a conformity assessment body
conveying formal demonstration of its competence to carry out specific conformity
assessment tasks;
accreditation body means an authoritative body that performs accreditation76;
attestation means the issuing of a statement based on a decision following review, that
fulfilment of specified technical requirements has been demonstrated;
Canadian technical regulation means a technical regulation of Canada’s national
government or of one or more of its provinces and territories;
conformity assessment means a process to determine whether relevant requirements in
technical regulations have been fulfilled. For the purpose of this Protocol, conformity
assessment does not include accreditation;
conformity assessment body means a body that performs conformity assessment activities
including calibration, testing, certification and inspection;
Decision 768/2008/EC means Decision 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 9 July 2008 on a common framework for the marketing of products, and repealing
Council Decision 93/465/EEC;
European Union technical regulation means a technical regulation of the European Union
and any measure adopted by a Member State implementing a Directive of the European
Union;
in-house body means a conformity assessment body that performs conformity assessment
activities for the entity of which it forms a part, such as, in the case of the European Union
and its Member States, an accredited in-house body fulfilling the requirements in Article R21
of Annex I to Decision 768/2008/EC or the corresponding requirements in a successor
instrument;
legitimate objective has the same meaning as under Article 2.2 of the TBT Agreement;
Mutual Recognition Agreement means the Agreement on Mutual Recognition between the
European Community and Canada, done at London on 14 May 1998;
third-party conformity assessment means conformity assessment that is performed by a
person or body that is independent of the person or organization that provides the product, and
of user interests in that product;
76

The authority of an accreditation body is generally derived from government.

695

third-party conformity assessment body means a conformity assessment body that
performs third-party conformity assessments.
Article 2
Scope and exceptions
1.

This Protocol applies to those categories of goods listed in Annex 1 for which a Party
recognises non-governmental bodies for the purpose of assessing conformity of
goods with that Party’s technical regulations.

2.

Within three years of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall consult
with a view to broadening the scope of application of this Protocol by modifying
Annex 1, to include additional categories of goods for which a Party has recognised
non-governmental bodies for the purpose of assessing conformity of those goods
with that Party’s technical regulations on or before the entry into force of this
Agreement. Priority categories of goods for consideration are set out in Annex 2.

3.

The Parties shall give positive consideration to making this Protocol applicable to
additional categories of goods which may become subject to third-party conformity
assessment by recognised non-governmental bodies pursuant to technical regulations
adopted by a Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. To that end,
the Party shall promptly notify the other Party, in writing, of any such technical
regulation that is adopted after the entry into force of this Agreement. If the other
Party expresses an interest in including a new category of goods in Annex 1 but the
notifying Party does not agree to it, the notifying Party shall provide to the other
Party, upon request, the reasons that justify its refusal to expand the scope of the
Protocol.

4.

If the Parties decide in accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3 to include additional
categories of goods in Annex 1, they shall request the Committee on Trade in Goods,
pursuant to Article 18(c), to make recommendations to the CETA Joint Committee to
amend Annex 1.

5.

This Protocol does not apply:
(a)

to sanitary and phytosanitary measures as defined in Annex A to the SPS
Agreement;

(b)

to purchasing specifications prepared by a governmental body for production
or consumption requirements of that body;

(c)

to activities performed by a non-governmental body on behalf of a market
surveillance or enforcement authority for post-market surveillance and
enforcement, except as provided for in Article 11;

(d)

if a Party has delegated exclusive authority to a single non-governmental body
to assess conformity of goods with that Party’s technical regulations;

(e)

to agricultural goods;

(f)

to the assessment of aviation safety, whether or not it is covered under the
Agreement on Civil Aviation Safety between Canada and the European
Community, done at Prague on 6 May 2009; and

696

(g)

to the statutory inspection and certification of vessels other than recreational
craft.

6.

This Protocol does not require the recognition or acceptance by a Party that the other
Party’s technical regulations are equivalent to its own.

7.

This Protocol does not limit the ability of a Party to prepare, adopt, apply or amend
conformity assessment procedures in accordance with Article 5 of the TBT
Agreement.

8.

This Protocol does not affect or modify the laws or obligations in the territory of a
Party applicable to civil liability.
Article 3
Recognition of conformity assessment bodies

1.

Canada shall recognise a conformity assessment body established in the European
Union as competent to assess conformity with specific Canadian technical
regulations, under conditions no less favourable than those applied for the
recognition of conformity assessment bodies established in Canada, provided that the
following conditions are met:
(a)

the conformity assessment body is accredited, by an accreditation body
recognised by Canada, as competent to assess conformity with those specific
Canadian technical regulations; or

(b)

(i)

the conformity assessment body established in the European Union is
accredited, by an accreditation body that is recognised pursuant to Article
12 or Article 15, as competent to assess conformity with those specific
Canadian technical regulations;

(ii)

the conformity assessment body established in the European Union is
designated by a Member State of the European Union in accordance with
the procedures set out in Article 5;

(iii) there are no unresolved objections pursuant to Article 6;
(iv) the designation made in accordance with the procedures set out in Article
5 is not withdrawn by a Member State of the European Union; and
(v)

2.

after the expiry of the 30 day period of time referred to in Article 6.1 or
6.2, the conformity assessment body established in the European Union
continues to meet all the conditions described in Article 5.5.

The European Union shall recognise a third-party conformity assessment body
established in Canada as competent to assess conformity with specific European
Union technical regulations, under conditions no less favourable than those applied
for the recognition of third-party conformity assessment bodies established in the
European Union, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a)

(i)

the conformity assessment body is accredited, by an accreditation body
appointed by one of the Member States of the European Union, as
competent to assess conformity with those specific European Union
technical regulations;

697

(ii)

the third-party conformity assessment body established in Canada is
designated by Canada in accordance with the procedures set out in
Article 5;

(iii) there are no unresolved objections pursuant to Article 6;
(iv) the designation made in accordance with the procedures set out Article 5
is not withdrawn by Canada; and

(b)

(v)

after the expiry of the 30 day period of time referred to in Article 6.1 or
6.2, the third-party conformity assessment body established in Canada
continues to meet all the conditions described in Article 5.2;or

(i)

the third-party conformity assessment body established in Canada is
accredited, by an accreditation body that is recognised pursuant to Article
12 or 15 , as competent to assess conformity with those specific
European Union technical regulations;

(ii)

the third-party conformity assessment body established in Canada is
designated by Canada in accordance with the procedures set out in
Article 5;

(iii) there are no unresolved objections pursuant to Article 6;
(iv) the designation made in accordance with the procedures set out Article 5
is not withdrawn by Canada; and
(v)

3.

after the expiry of the 30 day period of time referred to in Article 6.1 or
6.2, the third-party conformity assessment body established in Canada
continues to meet all the conditions described in Article 5.2.

Each Party shall maintain and publish a list of recognised conformity assessment
bodies which includes the scope for which each body is recognised. The European
Union shall assign an identification number to conformity assessment bodies
established in Canada that are recognised under this Protocol, and shall list those
conformity assessment bodies in the information system of the European Union,
namely the New Approach Notified and Designated Organisations (“NANDO”) or a
successor system.
Article 4
Accreditation of conformity assessment bodies

The Parties recognise that a conformity assessment body should seek accreditation from an
accreditation body that is in the territory in which the conformity assessment body is
established, provided that that accreditation body has been recognised pursuant to Article 12
or 15 as able to grant the specific accreditation sought by the conformity assessment body. If
there is no accreditation body in the territory of a Party that is recognised pursuant to Article
12 or 15 as able to grant a specific accreditation sought by a conformity assessment body
established in the territory of that Party, then:
(a)

each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure
that accreditation bodies in its territory accredit conformity assessment bodies
established in the territory of the other Party under conditions no less favourable than
those applied to conformity assessment bodies established in its territory;
698

(b)

a Party shall not adopt or maintain measures which limit the ability of accreditation
bodies in its territory to accredit, or discourage those accreditation bodies from
accrediting, on conditions no less favourable than those applied for the accreditation
of conformity assessment bodies established in the recognizing Party’s territory,
conformity assessment bodies established in the territory of the other Party;

(c)

a Party shall not adopt or maintain measures requiring or encouraging accreditation
bodies in its territory to apply conditions for the accreditation of conformity
assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party that are less favourable than
those applied for the accreditation of conformity assessment bodies in its territory.
Article 5
Designation of conformity assessment bodies

1.

A Party shall designate a conformity assessment body by notifying the contact point
of the other Party and sending to that contact point the information described in
Annex 3. The European Union shall allow Canada to use the European Union’s
electronic notification tool for those purposes.

2.

Canada shall only designate a conformity assessment body that meets the following
conditions and shall take reasonable measures to ensure that the conditions continue
to be met:
(a)

the conformity assessment body meets the requirements set out in Article R17
of Annex I to Decision 768/2008/EC, or the corresponding requirements in
successor instruments, except that establishment under national law is
interpreted as meaning Canadian law for the purposes of this Protocol; and

(b)

(i)

the conformity assessment body is accredited, by an accreditation body
appointed by a Member State of the European Union, as competent to
assess conformity with the European Union technical regulations for
which the conformity assessment body is being designated; or

(ii)

the conformity assessment body is accredited, by an accreditation body
established in Canada that is recognised pursuant to Articles 12 or 15, as
competent to assess conformity with the European Union technical
regulations for which the conformity assessment body is being
designated.

3.

The Parties shall deem the applicable requirements of Article R17 of Annex I to
Decision 768/2008/EC to be met when the conformity assessment body is accredited
pursuant to either procedure described in subparagraph 2(b) and if the accreditation
body requires, as a condition for granting the accreditation, that the conformity
assessment body meet requirements equivalent to the applicable requirements of
Article R17 of Annex I to Decision 768/2008/EC or the corresponding requirements
in successor instruments.

4.

If the European Union considers revising the requirements set out in Article R17 of
Annex I to Decision 768/2008/EC, it shall consult Canada at the earliest stage of, and
throughout, the review process with a view to ensuring that conformity assessment
bodies in the territory of Canada continue to meet any revised requirements on no

699

less favourable conditions than conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the
European Union.
5.

6.

A Member State of the European Union shall only designate a conformity
assessment body that meets the following conditions and shall take reasonable
measures to ensure that the conditions continue to be met:
(a)

the conformity assessment body is established in the territory of the Member
State; and

(b)

(i)

the conformity assessment body is accredited, by an accreditation body
recognised by Canada, as competent to assess conformity with the
Canadian technical regulations for which the conformity assessment
body is being designated; or

(ii)

the conformity assessment body is accredited, by an accreditation body
established in the European Union that has been recognised pursuant to
Article 12 or 15, as competent to assess conformity with the Canadian
technical regulations for which the conformity assessment body is being
designated.

A Party may refuse to recognise a conformity assessment body that does not meet the
conditions in paragraph 2 or 5, as the case may be.
Article 6
Objections to the designation of conformity assessment bodies

1.

2.

A Party may object to the designation of a conformity assessment body, within 30
days of the notification by the other Party pursuant to Article 5.1, if:
(a)

the Party which designated the conformity assessment body failed to provide
the information described in Annex 3; or

(b)

the Party has reasons to believe that the conformity assessment body that is
designated does not meet the conditions described in Article 5.2 or 5.5.

Following any subsequent transmission of information by the other Party, a Party
may object within 30 days of the receipt of that information, if the information
remains insufficient to demonstrate that the designated conformity assessment body
meets the conditions described in Article 5.2 or 5.5.
Article 7
Challenges to designations of conformity assessment bodies

1.

A Party which has recognised a conformity assessment body under this Protocol may
challenge the competence of that conformity assessment body if:
(a)

the Party which designated the conformity assessment body failed to take the
actions required by Article 11.3, following a notification by the other Party of
the non-conformity with applicable technical regulations of a product that had
been assessed as being in conformity with these technical regulations by that
conformity assessment body; or

700

(b)

the Party has reasons to believe that the results of conformity assessment
activities performed by that conformity assessment body do not provide
sufficient assurances that the products assessed by that body as conforming
with applicable technical regulations are in fact in conformity with these
technical regulations.

2.

A Party which challenges the competence of a recognised conformity assessment
body under this Protocol shall immediately notify the Party which designated the
conformity assessment body of the challenge, and provide the reasons for the
challenge.

3.

A Party that:
(a)

has challenged the competence of a recognised conformity assessment body
under this Protocol; and

(b)

has well-founded reasons to believe that the products assessed to be in
conformity with applicable technical regulations by that conformity assessment
body may fail to conform to its technical regulations,

may refuse to accept the results of that conformity assessment body’s conformity
assessment activities until the challenge is resolved or the recognising Party has
ceased to recognise the conformity assessment body in accordance with paragraph 5.
4.

The Parties shall cooperate and make reasonable efforts to resolve the challenge
promptly.

5.

Without prejudice to paragraph 3, the recognising Party may cease to recognise the
conformity assessment body whose competence is challenged if:
(a)

the Parties resolve the challenge by concluding that the recognising Party has
raised valid concerns as to the competence of the conformity assessment body;

(b)

the Party which designated the conformity assessment body failed to complete
the actions required by Article 11.3 within 60 days after being notified
pursuant to subparagraph 1(a); or

(c)

the recognising Party objectively demonstrates to the other Party that the
results of conformity assessment activities performed by that conformity
assessment body do not provide sufficient assurance that the products assessed
by it as conforming with the applicable technical regulations are in fact in
conformity with these technical regulations; and

(d)

the challenge has not been resolved within 120 days after the Party that had
designated the conformity assessment body has been notified of the challenge
pursuant to paragraph 1.
Article 8
Withdrawals of conformity assessment bodies

1.

A Party shall withdraw the designation, or modify the scope of the designation, as
appropriate, of a conformity assessment body it has designated if the Party becomes
aware that:
(a)

the conformity assessment body’s scope of accreditation has been reduced;
701

(b)

the conformity assessment body’s accreditation lapses;

(c)

the conformity assessment body no longer meets the other conditions described
in Article 5.2 or 5.5; or

(d)

the conformity assessment body is no longer willing, or is otherwise no longer
competent or able, to assess conformity within the scope for which it was
designated.

2.

A Party shall notify the other Party, in writing, of a withdrawal or modification of the
scope of a designation under paragraph 1.

3.

When a Party withdraws the designation or modifies the scope of the designation of a
conformity assessment body owing to concerns about the competence or the
continued fulfilment by that conformity assessment body of the requirements and
responsibilities to which it is subject under Article 5, it shall communicate the
reasons for its decision in writing to the other Party.

4.

When communicating with the other Party, a Party shall indicate the date as of which
it considers that any of the conditions or concerns enumerated under paragraphs 1 or
3 may have applied to the conformity assessment body.

5.

Without prejudice to Article 7.5, the recognising Party may immediately cease to
recognise a conformity assessment body as competent if:
(a)

the conformity assessment body’s accreditation lapses;

(b)

the conformity assessment body voluntarily withdraws its recognition;

(c)

the designation of the conformity assessment body is withdrawn pursuant to
this Article;

(d)

the conformity assessment body ceases to be established in the territory of the
other Party; or

(e)

the recognising Party ceases to recognise the accreditation body that accredited
the conformity assessment body pursuant to Article 13 or 14.
Article 9

Acceptance of the results of conformity assessment by recognised conformity assessment
bodies
1.

A Party shall accept the results of conformity assessment activities performed by
conformity assessment bodies established in the other Party’s territory which the
Party recognises in accordance with Article 3 under conditions no less favourable
than those applied to the results of conformity assessment activities performed by
recognised conformity assessment bodies in its territory. The Party shall accept these
results regardless of the nationality and location of the supplier or manufacturer, or
of the country of origin of the product for which the conformity assessment activities
are performed.

2.

If a Party has ceased to recognise a conformity assessment body established in the
territory of the other Party, it may cease to accept the results of conformity
assessment activities performed by that conformity assessment body from the date
when it ceased to recognise that conformity assessment body. Unless the Party has
702

reasons to believe that the conformity assessment body established in the territory of
the other Party was not competent to assess conformity of products with the technical
regulations of the Party prior to the date when the Party ceased to recognise that
conformity assessment body, the Party shall continue to accept the results of
conformity assessment activities performed by that conformity assessment body prior
to the date when the Party ceased to recognise the conformity assessment body, even
though the products may have been placed on the market of the Party after that date.
Article 10
Acceptance of results of conformity assessment by in-house bodies established in
Canada
1.

The European Union shall accept the results of conformity assessment activities
performed by an accredited in-house body established in Canada under conditions no
less favourable than those applied to the results of conformity assessment activities
performed by an accredited in-house body established in the territory of one of the
Member States of the European Union, provided that:
(a)

the in-house body established in Canada is accredited, by an accreditation body
that has been appointed by one of the Member States of the European Union,
as competent to assess conformity with those technical regulations; or

(b)

the in-house body established in Canada is accredited, by an accreditation body
that has been recognised pursuant to Article 12 or 15 as competent to assess
conformity with those technical regulations.

2.

If, at the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Canada has no conformity
assessment procedure providing for conformity assessment activities to be performed
by in-house bodies and after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Canada
considers developing conformity assessment procedures providing for conformity
assessment activities to be performed by in-house bodies, it shall consult the
European Union at the earliest stage of, and throughout the rule-making process with
a view to ensuring that in-house bodies established in the European Union can meet
any requirements laid down in those provisions on no less favourable conditions than
in-house bodies established in Canada.

3.

Results pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be accepted regardless of the country of
origin of the product for which the conformity assessment activities were performed.
Article 11
Market surveillance, enforcement and safeguards

1.

Except for customs procedures, a Party shall ensure that activities performed by
market surveillance or enforcement authorities for the inspection or verification of
conformity with applicable technical regulations for products assessed by a
recognised conformity assessment body established in the territory of the other Party
or an in-house body which meets the conditions of Article 10, are conducted under
conditions no less favourable than those conducted with respect to products assessed
by conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the recognising Party. The Parties
shall co-operate as necessary in the conduct of these activities.
703

2.

If a product’s placement or use on the market could compromise the fulfilment of a
legitimate objective, a Party may adopt or maintain measures with respect to that
product provided that they are consistent with this Agreement. These measures can
include withdrawing the product from the market, prohibiting its placement or use on
the market or restricting its movement on the market. A Party that adopts or
maintains such measures shall promptly inform the other Party and, at the request of
the other Party, provide its reasons for adopting or maintaining these measures.

3.

A Party shall, upon receipt of a written complaint by the other Party, which must be
supported by evidence, that products assessed by a conformity assessment body that
the Party designated do not comply with applicable technical regulations:

4.

(a)

promptly seek additional information from the designated conformity
assessment body, its accreditation body and relevant operators when necessary;

(b)

investigate the complaint; and

(c)

provide the other Party with a written reply to the complaint.

A Party may take the actions in paragraph 3 through an accreditation body.
Article 12
Recognition of accreditation bodies

1.

A Party (“recognising Party”) may, in accordance with the procedure described
under paragraphs 2 and 3, recognise an accreditation body established in the territory
of the other Party (“nominating Party”) as competent to accredit conformity
assessment bodies as, themselves, competent to assess conformity with the relevant
technical regulations of the recognising Party.

2.

The nominating Party may request that the other Party recognise an accreditation
body established on its territory as competent by providing a notification to the
recognising Party that includes the following information regarding that accreditation
body (“nominated accreditation body”):
(a)

its name, address and contact details;

(b)

evidence that its authority is derived from the government;

(c)

whether it acts on a non-commercial and non-competitive basis;

(d)

evidence of its independence from the conformity assessment bodies it assesses
and from commercial pressures, in order to ensure that no conflicts of interest
with conformity assessment bodies occur;

(e)

evidence that it is organised and operated so as to safeguard the objectivity and
impartiality of its activities and the confidentiality of the information it obtains;

(f)

evidence that each decision relating to the attestation of competence of
conformity assessment bodies is taken by a competent person different from
those who carry out the assessment;

(g)

the scope for which its recognition is requested;

(h)

evidence of its competence to accredit conformity assessment bodies within the
scope for which its recognition is requested, referring to applicable
704

international standards, guides and recommendations, and applicable European
or Canadian standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures;
(i)

evidence of its internal procedures to ensure efficient management and
appropriate internal controls, including the procedures in place for
documenting the duties, responsibilities and authorities of personnel who can
affect the quality of the assessment as well as the attestation of competence;

(j)

evidence of the number of competent personnel at its disposal, which should be
sufficient for the proper performance of its tasks, and of the procedures in place
for monitoring the performance and competence of the personnel involved in
the accreditation process;

(k)

whether or not it is appointed for the scope for which its recognition is
requested in the territory of the nominating Party;

(l)

evidence of its status as a signatory to the International Laboratory
Accreditation Cooperation (“ILAC”) or International Accreditation Forum
(“IAF”) multilateral recognition arrangements and to any related regional
recognition arrangements; and

(m) any other information that the Parties may decide is necessary.
3.

The Parties recognise that differences may exist between their respective standards,
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures. When such differences
exist, the recognising Party may seek to satisfy itself that the nominated accreditation
body is competent to accredit conformity assessment bodies as competent to assess
conformity with the relevant technical regulations of the recognising Party. The
recognising Party may satisfy itself based on the following:
(a)

an arrangement establishing cooperation between the European and Canadian
accreditation systems;

or, in the absence of such an arrangement,
(b)

a cooperation arrangement between the nominated accreditation body and an
accreditation body recognised as competent by the recognising Party.

4.

Pursuant to a request made under paragraph 2, and subject to paragraph 3, a Party
shall recognise a competent accreditation body established in the territory of the
other Party under conditions no less favourable than those applied to the recognition
of accreditation bodies established in its territory.

5.

The recognising Party shall respond in writing within 60 days to a request made
under paragraph 2, and provide the following information in its response:
(a)

that it recognises the nominating Party's accreditation body as competent to
accredit conformity assessment bodies for the scope proposed;

(b)

that it will recognise the nominating Party’s accreditation body as competent to
accredit conformity assessment bodies for the scope proposed following
necessary legislative or regulatory amendments. Such a response must include
an explanation of the amendments required and an estimate of the period of
time required for the entry into force of the amendments;

705

6.

(c)

that the nominating Party failed to provide the information described in
paragraph 2. Such a response must include a statement of what information is
missing; or

(d)

that it does not recognise the nominated accreditation body as competent to
accredit conformity assessment bodies for the scope proposed. Such a
statement must be justified in an objective and reasoned manner, and state
explicitly the conditions under which recognition would be granted.

Each Party shall publish the names of the accreditation bodies of the other Party that
it recognises, and for each accreditation body, the scope of the technical regulations
for which it recognises that accreditation body.
Article 13
Cessation of the recognition of accreditation bodies

If an accreditation body that is recognised by a Party pursuant to Article 12 ceases to be a
signatory of a multilateral or regional arrangement referred to in subparagraph (l) of Article
12.2 or of a cooperation arrangement of the type described in Article 12.3, the recognising
Party may cease to recognise that accreditation body as competent, as well as any conformity
assessment bodies recognised on the basis that they were accredited solely by that
accreditation body.
Article 14
Challenges to the recognition of accreditation bodies
1.

Without prejudice to Article 13, the recognising Party may challenge the competence
of an accreditation body that it has recognised under subparagraphs (a) or (b) of
Article 12.5 on the grounds that the accreditation body is no longer competent to
accredit conformity assessment bodies as, themselves, competent to assess
conformity with the relevant technical regulations of the recognising Party. The
recognising Party shall immediately notify the nominating Party of the challenge and
shall justify its reasons in an objective and reasoned manner.

2.

The Parties shall cooperate and make reasonable efforts to promptly resolve the
challenge. If a cooperation arrangement referred to in Article 12.3 exists, the Parties
shall ensure that the European and Canadian accreditation systems or bodies, referred
to in Article 12.3, seek to resolve the challenge on behalf of the Parties.

3.

The recognising Party may cease to recognise the nominated accreditation body
whose competence is challenged and any conformity assessment bodies recognised
on the basis that they were accredited solely by that accreditation body if:
(a)

the Parties, including through the European and Canadian accreditation
systems, resolve the challenge by concluding that the recognising Party has
raised valid concerns as to the competence of the nominated accreditation
body; or

(b)

the recognising Party objectively demonstrates to the other Party that the
accreditation body is no longer competent to accredit conformity assessment

706

bodies as, themselves, competent to assess conformity with the relevant
technical regulations of the recognising Party; and
(c)

the challenge has not been resolved within 120 days after the nominating Party
has been notified of the challenge.
Article 15

Recognition of accreditation bodies in the areas of telecommunications and
electromagnetic compatibility
1.

For technical regulations related to telecommunications terminal equipment,
information technology equipment, apparatus used for radio communication, and
electromagnetic compatibility, from the date of entry into force of this Protocol, the
accreditation bodies recognised by:
(a)

(b)

Canada, include:
(i)

for test laboratories, any national accreditation body of a Member State
of the European Union that is a signatory to the ILAC multilateral
recognition arrangement; and

(ii)

for certification bodies, any national accreditation body of a Member
State of the European Union that is a signatory to the IAF multilateral
recognition arrangement;

the European Union, include the Standards Council of Canada, or its successor.
Article 16
Transition from the Mutual Recognition Agreement

The Parties agree that a conformity assessment body which had been designated under the
Mutual Recognition Agreement is automatically a recognised conformity assessment body
under this Protocol, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 17
Communication
1.

Each Party shall identify contact points responsible for communications with the
other Party related to any matter arising under this Protocol.

2.

The contact points may communicate by electronic mail, video-conferencing or other
means on which they decide.
Article 18
Management of this Protocol

For the purposes of this Protocol, the functions of the Committee on Trade in Goods
established under Article 26.2.1 (a) (Committees) include:
(a)

managing the implementation of this Protocol;

(b)

addressing any matter that a Party may raise related to this Protocol;
707

(c)

developing recommendations for amendments to this Protocol for consideration by
the CETA Joint Committee;

(d)

taking any other step that the Parties consider will assist them in implementing this
Protocol; and

(e)

reporting to the CETA Joint Committee on the implementation of this Protocol, as
appropriate.

708

ANNEX 1
PRODUCT COVERAGE
(a)

Electrical and electronic equipment, including electrical installations and appliances,
and related components;

(b)

Radio and telecommunications terminal equipment;

(c)

Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC);

(d)

Toys;

(e)

Construction products;

(f)

Machinery, including parts, components, including
interchangeable equipment, and assemblies of machines;

(g)

Measuring instruments;

(h)

Hot-water boilers, including related appliances;

(i)

Equipment, machines, apparatus, devices, control components, protection systems,
safety devices, controlling devices and regulating devices, and related
instrumentation and prevention and detection systems for use in potentially explosive
atmospheres (ATEX equipment);

(j)

Equipment for use outdoors as it relates to noise emission in the environment; and

(k)

Recreational craft, including their components.

709

safety

components,

ANNEX 2
PRIORITY CATEGORIES OF GOODS FOR CONSIDERATION FOR INCLUSION
IN ANNEX 1 PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 1.2
(a)

Medical devices including accessories;

(b)

Pressure equipment, including vessels, piping, accessories and assemblies;

(c)

Appliances burning gaseous fuels, including related fittings;

(d)

Personal protective equipment;

(e)

Rail systems, subsystems and interoperability constituents; and

(f)

Equipment placed on board a ship

710

ANNEX 3
INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED AS PART OF A DESIGNATION
The information that a Party must provide when designating a conformity assessment body is
as follows:
(a)

in all cases:
(i)

the scope of designation (not to exceed that body’s scope of accreditation);

(ii)

the accreditation certificate and the related scope of accreditation;

(iii) the body’s address and contact information; and
(b)

when a Member State of the European Union designates a certification body, except
for in regards to the technical regulations described in Article 15:
(i)

(c)

the certification body’s registered certification mark, including the qualifying
statement77; and

when a Member State of the European Union designates a conformity assessment
body in regards to technical regulations described in Article 15:
(i)

in the case of a certification body:
(A) its unique identifier78;

(ii)

(B)

an application for recognition signed by the body in accordance with CB01 (Requirements for Certification Bodies), or its successor; and

(C)

a cross reference checklist completed by the body with evidence that it
meets the applicable recognition criteria in accordance with CB-02
(Recognition Criteria, and Administrative and Operational Requirements
Applicable to Certification Bodies (CB) for the Certification of Radio
Apparatus to Industry Canada’s Standards and Specifications), or its
successor; and

in the case of a testing laboratory:
(A) its unique identifier; and
(B)

(d)

77

78

an application for recognition signed by the body in accordance with
REC-LAB (Procedure for the Recognition of Designated Foreign Testing
Laboratories by Industry Canada), or its successor; and

any other information as may be jointly decided upon by the Parties.

The qualifying statement normally takes the form of a small “c” placed beside the certification body’s
registered certification mark to indicate that a product conforms with applicable Canadian technical
regulations.
A unique six-character identifier comprised of two letters (usually the ISO 3166 country code) followed
by four numbers.

711

Protocol on the mutual recognition of the compliance and enforcement programme
regarding good manufacturing practices for pharmaceutical products
Article 1
Definitions
1.

For the purposes of this Protocol:
certificate of GMP compliance means a certificate issued by a regulatory authority
attesting to the compliance of a manufacturing facility with Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP);
equivalent authority means a regulatory authority of a Party that is recognised as an
equivalent authority by the other Party;
manufacturing includes fabrication, packaging, re-packaging, labelling, testing and
storage;
medicinal product or drug means any product qualifying as a drug under the Food
and Drugs Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27 or qualifying as a medicinal product, whether it
is a finished, intermediate or an investigational product or an active substance under
the applicable legislation of the European Union;
on-site evaluation means a product-specific evaluation conducted in the context of a
marketing application for a medicinal product or drug at the site of manufacture to
assess the conformity of the premises where the medicinal product or drug is
manufactured, the conformity of the process, conditions and control of manufacture
with the information submitted, and to address any outstanding issues from the
evaluation of the marketing application; and
regulatory authority means an entity in a Party that has the legal right, under the
law of the Party, to supervise and control medicinal products or drugs within that
Party.

2.

Unless specified otherwise, where this Protocol refers to inspections, these references
do not include on-site evaluations.
Article 2
Objective

The objective of this Protocol is to strengthen the cooperation between the authorities of the
Parties in ensuring that medicinal products and drugs meet appropriate quality standards
through the mutual recognition of certificates of GMP compliance.
Article 3
Product scope
This Protocol applies to all medicinal products or drugs to which GMP requirements apply in
both Parties, as set out in Annex 1.

712

Article 4
Recognition of regulatory authorities
1.

The procedure for evaluating the equivalency of a new regulatory authority listed in
Annex 2 shall be conducted in accordance with Article 12.

2.

Each Party shall ensure that a list of regulatory authorities that it recognises as
equivalent, including any modifications, is publicly available.
Article 5
Mutual recognition of certificates of GMP compliance

1.

A Party shall accept a certificate of GMP compliance issued by an equivalent
regulatory authority of the other Party, in conformity with paragraph 3, as
demonstrating that the manufacturing facility, that is covered by the certificate and
located in the territory of either Party, complies with the good manufacturing
practices identified in the certificate.

2.

A Party may accept a certificate of GMP compliance issued by an equivalent
regulatory authority of the other Party with respect to a manufacturing facility
outside the territory of the Parties, in conformity with paragraph 3. A Party may
determine the terms and conditions upon which it chooses to accept the certificate.

3.

A certificate of GMP compliance must identify:

4.

(a)

the name and address of the manufacturing facility;

(b)

the date on which the equivalent regulatory authority that issued the certificate
last inspected the manufacturing facility;

(c)

the manufacturing processes and if relevant, medicinal products or drugs and
dosage forms for which the facility is in compliance with good manufacturing
practices; and

(d)

the validity period of the certificate of GMP compliance.

If an importer, an exporter or a regulatory authority of a Party requests a certificate
of GMP compliance for a manufacturing facility that is certified by an equivalent
authority of the other Party, the other Party shall ensure that the equivalent regulatory
authority issues a certificate of GMP compliance:
(a)

within 30 calendar days of the date on which the certifying authority received
the request for the certificate, if a new inspection is not required; and

(b)

within 90 calendar days of the date on which the certifying authority received
the request for the certificate, if a new inspection is required, and the
manufacturing facility passes the inspection.
Article 6
Other recognition of certificates of GMP compliance

1.

A Party may accept a certificate of GMP compliance with respect to a medicinal
product or drug that is not included in paragraph 2 of Annex 1.

713

2.

A Party that accepts a certificate under paragraph 1 may determine the terms and
conditions under which it will accept the certificate.
Article 7
Acceptance of batch certificates

1.

A Party shall accept a batch certificate issued by a manufacturer without re-control of
that batch at import provided that:
(a)

the products in the batch were manufactured in a manufacturing facility that
has been certified as compliant by an equivalent regulatory authority;

(b)

the batch certificate is consistent with the Content of the Batch Certificate for
Medicinal Products of the Internationally Harmonized Requirements for Batch
Certification; and

(c)

the batch certificate is signed by the person responsible for releasing the batch
for sale or supply.

2.

Paragraph 1 does not affect a Party’s right to conduct official batch release.

3.

The person responsible for releasing the batch:
(a)

of the finished medicinal product for sale or supply for manufacturing facilities
in the European Union, must be a “qualified person” as defined in Article 48 of
Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 52 of Directive 2001/82/EC; or

(b)

for sale or supply of a drug for manufacturing facilities in Canada, is the person
in charge of the quality control department as provided for by the Food and
Drugs Regulations, C.R.C., c. 870, Part C, Division 2, section C.02.014.
Article 8
On-site evaluation

1.

A Party has the right to conduct its own on-site evaluation of a manufacturing facility
that has been certified as compliant by an equivalent regulatory authority of the other
Party.

2.

A Party, prior to conducting an on-site evaluation under paragraph 1, shall notify the
other Party in writing and inform that other Party of the scope of the on-site
evaluation. The Party shall endeavour to notify the other Party in writing at least 30
days before a proposed on-site evaluation, but may provide less notice in urgent
situations. The other Party has the right to join the on-site evaluation conducted by
the Party.
Article 9
Inspections and on-site evaluations at the request of a Party

1.

At the request of a Party, the other Party shall inspect a facility involved in the
manufacturing process of a medicinal product or drug that is being imported into the
territory of the requesting Party in order to verify that the facility is in compliance
with good manufacturing practices.

714

2.

At the request of a Party, the other Party may conduct an on-site evaluation based on
the assessment of data contained in a product submission dossier. The Parties may
exchange relevant product information with respect to a request to conduct an on-site
evaluation in accordance with Article 14.
Article 10
Safeguards

1.

A Party has the right to conduct its own inspection of a manufacturing facility that
has been certified as compliant by an equivalent regulatory authority of the other
Party. Recourse to this right should be an exception from the normal practice of the
Party.

2.

A Party, prior to conducting an inspection under paragraph 1, shall notify the other
Party in writing and shall inform the other Party of the reasons for conducting its
own inspection. The Party shall endeavour to notify the other Party in writing at least
30 days before a proposed inspection, but may provide less notice in urgent
situations. The other Party has the right to join the inspection conducted by the Party.
Article 11
Two-way alert programme and information sharing

1.

2.

3.

A Party shall, pursuant to the two-way alert programme under the GMP
Administrative Arrangement referred to in Article 15.3:
(a)

ensure that a restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a manufacturing
authorisation that could affect the protection of public health is communicated
from the relevant regulatory authority in its territory to the relevant regulatory
authority in the territory of the other Party; and

(b)

if relevant, proactively notify the other Party in writing of a confirmed report of
a serious problem relating to a manufacturing facility in its territory, or as
identified through an on-site evaluation or inspection in the territory of the
other Party, including a problem related to quality defects, batch recalls,
counterfeited or falsified medicinal products or drugs, or potential serious
shortages.

A Party shall, as part of the components of the information sharing process under the
GMP Administrative Arrangement referred to in Article 15.3:
(a)

respond to a special request for information, including a reasonable request for
an inspection report or an on-site evaluation report; and

(b)

ensure that, at the request of the other Party or of an equivalent authority of the
other Party, an equivalent authority within its territory provides relevant
information.

A Party shall provide the other Party, through written notification, contact points for
each equivalent authority in its territory.

715

Article 12
Equivalence of new regulatory authorities
1.

A Party (“requesting Party”) may request that a regulatory authority in its territory
that is not recognised as equivalent to regulatory authorities in the other Party
(“evaluating Party”), be evaluated to determine whether it should be recognised as
equivalent. Upon receiving the request, the evaluating Party shall conduct an
evaluation pursuant to the procedure for evaluating new regulatory authorities under
the GMP Administrative Arrangement referred to in Article 15.3.

2.

The evaluating Party shall evaluate the new regulatory authority by applying the
components of a GMP compliance programme under the Administrative
Arrangement referred to in Article 15.3. The components of a GMP compliance
programme must include such elements as legislative and regulatory requirements,
inspections standards, surveillance systems and a quality management system.

3.

If, upon completion of its evaluation, the evaluating Party determines that the new
regulatory authority is equivalent, it shall notify the requesting Party in writing that it
recognises the new regulatory authority as equivalent.

4.

If, upon completion of its evaluation, the evaluating Party determines that the new
regulatory authority is not equivalent, the evaluating Party shall provide to the
requesting Party a written justification demonstrating that it has well-founded
reasons for not recognising that the new regulatory authority is equivalent. At the
request of the requesting Party, the Joint Sectoral Group on Pharmaceuticals (“Joint
Sectoral Group”) referred to in Article 15 shall consider the evaluating Party’s
refusal to recognise the new regulatory authority as equivalent, and may provide
recommendations to assist both Parties to resolve the matter.

5.

If, upon completion of its evaluation, the evaluating Party determines that the new
regulatory authority is only equivalent for a more limited scope than that proposed by
the requesting Party, the evaluating Party shall provide to the requesting Party a
written justification demonstrating that it has well-founded reasons to determine that
the new regulatory authority is only equivalent for the more limited scope. At the
request of the requesting Party, the Joint Sectoral Group shall consider the evaluating
Party’s refusal to recognise the new regulatory authority as equivalent, and may
provide recommendations to assist both Parties to resolve the matter.

6.

A regulatory authority recognised as equivalent under the Agreement on Mutual
Recognition Between the European Community and Canada, done at London on 14
May 1998, is recognised as equivalent under this Agreement from its entry into
force.
Article 13
Equivalence maintenance programme

1.

The Joint Sectoral Group shall develop an equivalence maintenance programme
under the GMP Administrative Arrangement referred to in Article 15.3 to maintain
the equivalence of the regulatory authorities. The Parties shall act in accordance with
this programme when deciding whether to change the equivalence status of a
regulatory authority.
716

2.

If the equivalence status of a regulatory authority changes, a Party may re-evaluate
that regulatory authority. Any re-evaluation must be undertaken pursuant to the
procedure set out in Article 12. The scope of re-evaluation shall be limited to the
elements that caused the change of the equivalence status.

3.

The Parties shall exchange all the necessary information to ensure that both Parties
remain confident that equivalent regulatory authorities are in fact equivalent.

4.

A Party shall inform the other Party before adopting changes to its technical
guidance or regulations relating to good manufacturing practices.

5.

A Party shall inform the other Party of any new technical guidance, inspection
procedures or regulations relating to good manufacturing practices.
Article 14
Confidentiality

1.

A Party shall not publicly disclose non-public and confidential technical, commercial
or scientific information, including trade secrets and proprietary information that it
has received from the other Party.

2.

A Party may disclose the information referred to in paragraph 1 if it deems such
disclosure necessary to protect public health and safety. The other Party shall be
consulted prior to disclosure.
Article 15
Management of the Protocol

1.

The Joint Sectoral Group, established under Article 26.2.1(a) (Committees), is
composed of representatives from both Parties.

2.

The Joint Sectoral Group shall establish its composition and determine its rules and
procedures.

3.

The Joint Sectoral Group shall conclude a GMP Administrative Arrangement to
facilitate the effective implementation of this Protocol. The GMP Administrative
Arrangement shall include:

4.

(a)

the terms of references of the Joint Sectoral Group;

(b)

the two-way alert programme;

(c)

the list of contact points responsible for matters arising under this Protocol;

(d)

the components of the information sharing process;

(e)

the components of a good manufacturing practices compliance programme;

(f)

the procedure for evaluating new Regulatory authorities; and

(g)

the equivalence maintenance programme.

The Joint Sectoral Group may modify the GMP Administrative Arrangement if it
considers it necessary.

717

5.

At the request of the Parties, the Joint Sectoral Group shall review the Annexes to
this Protocol, and shall develop recommendations for amendments to these Annexes
for consideration by the CETA Joint Committee.

6.

Pursuant to paragraph 5, the Joint Sectoral Group shall review the operational scope
of medicinal products or drugs under paragraph 2 of Annex 1, with a view to
including those medicinal products or drugs listed in paragraph 1 of Annex 1.

7.

The Parties shall establish the GMP Administrative Arrangement upon entry into
force of the Agreement. This Arrangement is not subject to the provisions of Chapter
Twenty-Nine (Dispute Settlement).
Article 16
Fees

1.

For the purposes of this Article, a fee includes a cost-recovery measure such as a user
fee, a regulatory charge or an amount set under a contract.

2.

A Party shall have the right to determine a fee applicable to manufacturing facilities
in its territory, including fees related to issuing certificates of GMP compliance and
fees related to inspections or on-site evaluations.

3.

The fees charged to a manufacturing facility in case of an inspection or on-site
evaluation conducted by a Party at the request of the other Party must be consistent
with paragraph 2.

718

ANNEX 1
MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR DRUGS
Scope of medicinal products or drugs
1.

This Protocol applies to the following medicinal products or drugs as defined in the
legislation of the Parties referred to in Annex 3, provided that the GMP requirements
and compliance programmes of both Parties, with respect to these medicinal products
or drugs, are equivalent:
(a)

human pharmaceuticals including prescription and non-prescription medicinal
products or drugs and medicinal gases;

(b)

human biologicals including immunologicals, stable medicinal products
derived from human blood or human plasma, and biotherapeutics;

(c)

human radiopharmaceuticals;

(d)

veterinary pharmaceuticals, including prescription and non-prescription
medicinal products or drugs, and pre-mixes for the preparation of veterinary
medicated feeds;

(e)

veterinary biologicals;

(f)

if appropriate, vitamins, minerals, herbal remedies and homeopathic medicinal
products;

(g)

active pharmaceutical ingredients;

(h)

intermediate products and bulk pharmaceuticals (for example, bulk tablets);

(i)

products intended for use in clinical trials or investigational medicinal
products; and

(j)

advanced therapy medicinal products.

Operational scope of medicinal products or drugs
2.

Further to paragraph 1, the GMP requirements and compliance programmes of both
Parties are equivalent for the following medicinal products or drugs:
(a)

human pharmaceuticals including prescription and non-prescription medicinal
products or drugs and medicinal gases;

(b)

human biologicals including immunologicals and biotherapeutics;

(c)

human radiopharmaceuticals;

(d)

veterinary pharmaceuticals, including prescription and non-prescription
medicinal products or drugs, and pre-mixes for the preparation of veterinary
medicated feeds;

(e)

intermediate products and bulk pharmaceuticals;

719

(f)

products intended for use in clinical trials or investigational medicinal
products; manufactured by the manufacturers holding a manufacturing
authorisation or establishment licence; and

(g)

vitamins, minerals and herbal remedies, homeopathic medicinal products
(known in Canada as natural health products) manufactured by manufacturers
holding a manufacturing authorisation or establishment licence, in the case of
Canada.

720

ANNEX 2
REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
The Parties recognise the following entities, or their successors notified by a Party to the Joint
Sectoral Group, as their respective regulatory authorities:
For the European Union:
Country

For medicinal products for
human use

For medicinal products for
veterinary use

Belgium

Federal agency for
medicines and health
products /

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Federaal Agentschap voor
geneesmiddelen en
gezondheidsproducten/
Agence fédérale des
médicaments et produits de
santé
Czech Republic

State Institute for Drug
Control /
Státní ústav pro kontrolu
léčiv (SÚKL)

Republic of Croatia

Denmark

Germany

Institute for State Control of
Veterinary Biologicals
andMedicaments/
Ústav pro státní kontrolu
veterinárních biopreparátů a
léčiv (ÚSKVBL)

Agency for Medicinal
Products and Medical
Devices /

Ministry of Agriculture,
Veterinary and Food Safety
Directorate /

Agencija za lijekove i
medicinske proizvode
(HALMED)

Ministarstvo Poljoprivrede,
Uprava za veterinarstvo i
sigurnost hrane

Danish Health and
Medicines Authority /
Laegemiddelstyrelsen

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Federal Institute for Drugs
and Medical Devices /

Federal Office for
Consumer Protection and

721

Bundesinstitut für
Arzneimittel und
Medizinprodukte (BfArM)

Food Safety /

Bundesamt für
Verbraucherschutz und
Lebensmittelsicherheit
Paul-Ehrlich-Institute (PEI), (BVL)
Federal Institute for
Federal Ministry of Food
Vaccines and Biomedicines and Agriculture,
/ Paul-Ehrlich-Institut (PEI) Bundesministerium für
Bundesinstitut für
Ernährung und
Impfstoffe
Landwirtschaft
und biomedizinische
Arzneimittel
Estonia

State Agency of Medicines / See responsible authority
for human medicinal
Ravimiamet
products

Greece

National Organisation for
Medicines /
Ethnikos Organismos
Farmakon (EOF) (ΕΘΝIΚΟΣ
ΟΡΓΑΝIΣΜΟΣ
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΩΝ))

Spain

Spanish Agency of
Medicines and Medical
Devices /

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Agencia Española de
Medicamentos y Productos
Sanitários
France

French National Agency for
Medicines and
Health Products Safety
Agence nationale de
sécurité du médicament et
des produits de santé
(ANSM)

722

French agency for food,
environmental and
occupational health safetyNational Agency for
Veterinary Medicinal
Products/
Agence Nationale de
Sécurité Sanitaire de
l’alimentation, de
l’environnement et du
travail-Agence Nationale du
Médicament Vétérinaire
(Anses-ANMV)

Ireland

Health Products Regulatory
Authority (HPRA)

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Italy

Italian Medicines Agency /
Agenzia Italiana del
Farmaco

Direction General for
Animal Health and
Veterinary Medicinal
Products
Ministero della Salute,
Direzione Generale della
Sanità Animale e dei
Farmaci Veterinari

Cyprus

Ministry of Health Pharmaceutical Services /
Φαρμακευτικές Υπηρεσίες,
Υπουργείο Υγείας

Ministry of Agriculture,
Rural Development and
EnvironmentVeterinary Services /
Κτηνιατρικές ΥπηρεσίεςΥπουργείο Γεωργίας,
Αγροτικής Ανάπτυξης και
Περιβάλλοντος

Latvia

State Agency of Medicines / Assessment and
Registration Department of
Zāļu valsts aģentūra
the Food and Veterinary
Service/Pārtikas un
veterinārā dienesta
Novērtēšanas un
reģistrācijas departaments

Lithuania

State Medicines Control
Agency /

State Food and Veterinary
Service /

Valstybinė maisto ir
veterinarijos tarnyba

Valstybinės maisto ir
veterinarijo tarnyba

Minìstere de la Santé,
Division de la Pharmacie et

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Luxembourg

des Médicaments
Hungary

National Institute of
Pharmacy /
Országos Gyógyszerészeti
Intézet (OGYI)

723

National Food Chain Safety
Office, Directorate of
Veterinary Medicinal
Products / Nemzeti
Élelmiszerlánc-biztonsági
Hivatal,

Állatgyógyászati Termékek
Igazgatósága (ÁTI)
Malta

Medicines Regulatory
Authority

Veterinary Medicines and
Animal Nutrition section
VMANS) (Veterinary
Regulation Directorate
(VRD) within
The Veterinary and
Phytosanitary Regulation
Department (VPRD)

Netherlands

Austria

Healthcare Inspectorate /
Inspectie voor de
Gezondheidszorg (IGZ)

Medicines Evaluation
Board /

Austrian Agency for Health
and Food Safety /

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Österreichische Agentur für
Gesundheit und
Ernährungssicherheit
GmbH
Poland

The Main Pharmaceutical
Inspectorate /
Główny Inspektorat
Farmaceutyczny (GIF) /

Portugal

National Authority of
Medicines and Health
Products /
INFARMED, I.P

Bureau
Diergeneesmiddelen,
College ter Beoordeling van
Geneesmiddelen (CBG)/

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

General Directorate of Food
and Veterinary / DGAV Direção Geral de
Alimentação e Veterinária
(PT)

Autoridade Nacional do
Medicamento e Produtos de
Saúde, I.P
Slovenia

Agency for Medicinal
Products and Medical

724

See responsible authority
for human medicinal

Devices of the Republic of
Slovenia /

products

Javna agencija Republike
Slovenije za zdravila in
medicinske pripomočke
(JAZMP)
Slovak Republic
(Slovakia)

Finland

State Institute for Drug
Control /

Institute for State Control of
Veterinary Biologicals and

Štátny ústav pre kontrolu
liečiv (ŠÚKL)

Medicaments /

Finnish Medicines Agency /

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

Lääkealan turvallisuus- ja
kehittämiskeskus (FIMEA)

Ústav štátnej kontroly
veterinárnych biopreparátov
a liečiv (USKVBL)

Sweden

Medical Products Agency /
Läkemedelsverket

See responsible authority
for human medicinal
products

United

Medicines and Healthcare
products Regulatory

Veterinary Medicines
Directorate

Kingdom

Agency
Bulgaria

Bulgarian Drug Agency /
изпълнителна агенция по
лекарствата

Romania

National Agency for
Medicines and Medical
Devices /
Agenţia Naţională a
Medicamentului şi a
Dispozitivelor Medicale

For Canada:

725

Bulgarian Food Safety
Agency /
Българска агенция по
безопасност на храните

National Sanitary
Veterinary and Food Safety
Authority / Autoritatea
Naţională Sanitară
Veterinară şi pentru
Siguranţa Alimentelor

Health Canada

726

Health Canada

ANNEX 3
APPLICABLE LEGISLATION
For the European Union:
Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use;
Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on
the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products;
Directive 2001/20/EC of European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the
approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States
relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on
medicinal products for human use;
Regulation (EU) 536/2014 of 16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for
human use, and repealing Directive 2001/20/EC;
Commission Directive 2003/94/EC of 8 October 2003 laying down the principles and
guidelines of good manufacturing practice in respect of medicinal products for human use and
investigational medicinal products for human use;
Commission Directive 91/412/EEC of 23 July 1991 laying down the principles and guidelines
of good manufacturing practice for veterinary medicinal products;
Commission delegated Regulation (EU) 1252/2014 of 28 May 2014 of the European
Parliament and of the Council with regard to principles and guidelines of good manufacturing
practice for active substances for medicinal products for human use;
Current version of the Guide to good manufacturing practices contained in volume IV of
Rules governing medicinal products in the European Union and compilation of the
community procedures on inspections and exchange of information;
For Canada:
Food and Drugs Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27.

727

ANNEX I
Headnote
Reservations for existing measures and liberalisation commitments
1.

The Schedule of a Party to this Annex sets out, under Articles 8.14 (Reservations and
exceptions), 9.7 (Reservations), 14.4 (Reservations), and, for the European Union,
Article 13.10 (Reservations and exceptions), the reservations taken by that Party with
respect to existing measures that do not conform with obligations imposed by:
(a)

Articles 8.6 (National treatment), 9.3 (National treatment) or, for the European
Union, Article 13.3 (National treatment);

(b)

Articles 8.7 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 9.5 (Most-favoured-nation
treatment) or, for the European Union, Article 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation
treatment);

(c)

Articles 8.4 (Market access), 9.6 (Market access) or, for the European Union,
Article 13.6 (Market access);

(d)

Article 8.5 (Performance requirements);

(e)

Article 8.8 (Senior management and boards of directors) or, for the European
Union, Article 13.8 (Senior management and boards of directors);

(f)

For the European Union, Article 13.7 (Cross-border supply of financial
services); or

(g)

Article 14.3 (Obligations);

and, in certain cases, sets out commitments for immediate or future liberalisation.
2.

The reservations of a Party are without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the
Parties under the GATS.

3.

Each reservation sets out the following elements:
(a)

Sector refers to the general sector in which the reservation is taken;

(b)

Sub-Sector refers to the specific sector in which the reservation is taken;

(c)

Industry Classification refers, where applicable, to the activity covered by the
reservation according to the CPC, ISIC rev 3.1, or as expressly otherwise
described in a Party’s reservation;

(d)

Type of Reservation specifies the obligation referred to in paragraph 1 for
which a reservation is taken;

(e)

Level of Government indicates the level of government maintaining the
measure for which a reservation is taken;

(f)

Measures identifies the laws or other measures, as qualified, where indicated,
by the Description element, for which the reservation is taken. A measure
cited in the Measures element:
(i)

means the measure as amended, continued or renewed as of the date of
entry into force of this Agreement;

728

(ii)

includes any subordinate measure adopted or maintained under the
authority of and consistent with the measure; and

(iii) includes:
(A) for a European Union Directive, any laws or other measures which
implement the Directive at Member State level; and
(B)

(g)

4.

for Canada, any laws or other measures at the national or subnational level that implement agreements between the federal
government and the provinces and territories; and

Description sets out the non-conforming aspects of the existing measure for
which the reservation is taken. It may also set out commitments for
liberalisation.

In the interpretation of a reservation, all elements of the reservation shall be
considered. A reservation shall be interpreted in the light of the relevant obligations
of the Chapters, against which the reservation is taken. To the extent that:
(a)

the Measures element is qualified by a liberalisation commitment from the
Description element, the Measures element as so qualified shall prevail over
all other elements; and

(b)

the Measures element is not so qualified, the Measures element shall prevail
over other elements, unless a discrepancy between the Measures element and
the other elements considered in their totality is so substantial and material that
it would be unreasonable to conclude that the Measures element prevails, in
which case the other elements shall prevail to the extent of that discrepancy.

5.

Where a Party maintains a measure that requires that a service supplier be a natural
person, citizen, permanent resident or resident of its territory as a condition to the
supply of a service in its territory, a reservation for that measure taken with respect to
cross-border trade in services shall operate as a reservation with respect to
investment, to the extent of that measure.

6.

A reservation for a measure that requires a service supplier be a natural person,
citizen, permanent resident, or resident of its territory as a condition to the supply of
a financial service in its territory taken with respect to Article 13.7 (Cross-border
supply of financial services) shall operate as a reservation with respect to Articles
13.3 (National treatment), 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 13.6 (Market
access), and 13.8 (Senior management and boards of ‎sritcerid), t‎thetfe‎rn‎etee‎ er‎et
.rtedeie.

7.

For the purposes of this Annex, including each Party’s Schedule to this Annex:

ISIC rev 3.1 means the International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic
Activities as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M,
N° 4, ISIC rev 3.1, 2002.
8.

The following abbreviations are used in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex:
AT

Austria

BE

Belgium
729

BG Bulgaria
CY Cyprus
CZ

Czech Republic

DE

Germany

DK Denmark
EU

European Union

ES

Spain

EE

Estonia

FI

Finland

FR

France

EL

Greece

HR Croatia
HU Hungary
IE

Ireland

IT

Italy

LV

Latvia

LT

Lithuania

LU

Luxembourg

MT Malta
NL

Netherlands

PL

Poland

PT

Portugal

RO Romania
SK

Slovakia

SI

Slovenia

SE

Sweden

UK United Kingdom

730

Schedule of Canada - Federal
Reservations applicable in Canada
(applicable in all Provinces and Territories)
Reservation I-C-1
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
Performance requirements
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Investment Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 28 (1st Supp.)
Investment Canada Regulations, S.O.R./85-611

Description:

Investment
1. Except as set out in paragraphs 3 and 7, the Director of
Investments will review a direct “acquisition of control”, as
defined in the Investment Canada Act, of a Canadian
business by an investor of the European Union if the value
of the Canadian business is not less than CAD $1.5 billion,
adjusted in accordance with the applicable methodology in
January of each subsequent year as set out in the Investment
Canada Act.
2. Notwithstanding the definition of “investor” in Article 8.1
(Definitions), only investors who are nationals of the
European Union or entities controlled by nationals of the
European Union as provided for in the Investment Canada
Act may benefit from the higher review threshold.
3. The higher threshold in paragraph 1 does not apply to a
direct acquisition of control by a state-owned enterprise of a
Canadian business. Such acquisitions are subject to review
by the Director of Investments if the value of the Canadian
business is not less than CAD $369 million in 2015, adjusted
in accordance with the applicable methodology in January of
each subsequent year as set out in the Investment Canada
Act.
4. An investment subject to review under the Investment
Canada Act may not be implemented unless the Minister
731

responsible for the Investment Canada Act advises the
applicant that the investment is likely to be of net benefit to
Canada. This determination is made in accordance with six
factors described in the Act, summarised as follows:
(a) the effect of the investment on the level and nature of
economic activity in Canada, including the effect on
employment, on the use of parts, components and
services produced in Canada and on exports from
Canada;
(b) the degree and significance of participation by
Canadians in the investment;
(c) the effect of the investment on productivity, industrial
efficiency, technological development and product
innovation in Canada;
(d) the effect of the investment on competition within an
industry in Canada;
(e) the compatibility of the investment with national
industrial, economic and cultural policies, taking into
consideration industrial, economic and cultural policy
objectives enunciated by the government or legislature
of a province likely to be significantly affected by the
investment; and
(f) the contribution of the investment to Canada’s ability to
compete in world markets.
5. In making a net benefit determination, the Minister, through
the Director of Investments, may review plans under which
the applicant demonstrates the net benefit to Canada of the
proposed acquisition. An applicant may also submit
undertakings to the Minister in connection with a proposed
acquisition that is the subject of review. In the event of
noncompliance with an undertaking by an applicant, the
Minister may seek a court order directing compliance or any
other remedy authorised under the Investment Canada Act.
6.

A non-Canadian who establishes or acquires a Canadian
business, other than those that are subject to review, as
described above, must notify the Director of Investments.

7. The review thresholds set out in paragraphs 1 and 3, do not
apply to an acquisition of a cultural business.
8. In addition, the specific acquisition or establishment of a
new business in designated types of business activities
relating to Canada’s cultural heritage or national identity,
which are normally notifiable, may be subject to review if
the Governor in Council authorises a review in the public

732

interest.
9. An indirect “acquisition of control” of a Canadian business
by an investor of the European Union other than a cultural
business is not reviewable.
10. Notwithstanding Article 8.5 (Performance requirements),
Canada may impose a requirement or enforce a commitment
or undertaking in connection with the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, conduct, operation, or management
of any investment of an investor of the European Union or of
a third country for the transfer of technology, production
process or other proprietary knowledge to a national or
enterprise, affiliated to the transferor, in Canada in
connection with the review of an acquisition of an
investment under the Investment Canada Act.
11. Except for requirements, commitments or undertakings
relating to technology transfer as set out in paragraph 10 of
this reservation, Article 8.5 (Performance requirements)
applies to requirements, commitments or undertakings
imposed or enforced under the Investment Canada Act.
12. For the purposes of this reservation, a “non-Canadian”
means an individual, government or agency thereof or an
entity that is not Canadian; and “Canadian” means a
Canadian citizen or permanent resident, a government in
Canada or agency thereof, or a Canadian-controlled entity as
described in the Investment Canada Act.

733

Reservation I-C-2
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

As set out in the Description element

Description:

Investment
1. Canada or a province or territory, when selling or disposing
of its equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing
government enterprise or an existing governmental entity,
may prohibit or impose limitations on the ownership of such
interests or assets and on the ability of owners of such
interests or assets to control a resulting enterprise by
investors of the European Union or of a third country or their
investments. With respect to such a sale or other disposition,
Canada or a province or territory may adopt or maintain a
measure relating to the nationality of senior management or
members of the board of directors.
2. For the purposes of this reservation:
(a) a measure maintained or adopted after the date of entry
into force of this Agreement that, at the time of sale or
other disposition, prohibits or imposes a limitation on
the ownership of equity interests or assets or imposes a
nationality requirement described in this reservation is
an existing measure; and
(b) government enterprise means an enterprise owned or
controlled through ownership interests by Canada or a
province or territory, and includes an enterprise
established after the date of entry into force of this
Agreement solely for the purposes of selling or
disposing of equity interests in, or the assets of, an
existing state enterprise or governmental entity.

734

Reservation I-C-3
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Canada Business Corporations Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-44
Canada Business Corporations Regulations, 2001, S.O.R./2001512
Canada Cooperatives Act, S.C. 1998, c. 1
Canada Cooperatives Regulations, S.O.R./99-256

Description:

Investment
1. A corporation may place constraints on the issue, transfer
and ownership of shares in a federally incorporated
corporation. The object of those constraints is to permit a
corporation to meet Canadian ownership or control
requirements, under certain laws set out in the Canada
Business Corporations Regulations, 2001, in sectors where
Canadian ownership or control is required as a condition to
receive licences, permits, grants, payments or other benefits.
In order to maintain certain Canadian ownership levels, a
corporation is permitted to sell shareholders’ shares without
the consent of those shareholders, and to purchase its own
shares on the open market.
2. The Canada Cooperatives Act provides that constraints may
be placed on the issue or transfer of investment shares of a
cooperative to persons not resident in Canada, to permit
cooperatives to meet Canadian ownership requirements to
obtain a licence to carry on a business, to become a publisher
of a Canadian newspaper or periodical or to acquire
investment shares of a financial intermediary and in sectors
where ownership or control is a required condition to receive
licences, permits, grants, payments and other benefits.
Where the ownership or control of investment shares would
adversely affect the ability of a cooperative to maintain a
level of Canadian ownership or control, the Canada
Cooperatives Act provides for the limitation of the number
of investment shares that may be owned or for the
prohibition of the ownership of investment shares.

735

3. For the purposes of this reservation Canadian means
“Canadian” as defined in the Canada Business Corporations
Regulations, 2001 or in the Canada Cooperatives
Regulations.

736

Reservation I-C-4
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Canada Business Corporations Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-44
Canada Business Corporations Regulations, 2001, S.O.R./2001512
Canada Cooperatives Act, S.C. 1998, c. 1
Canada Cooperatives Regulations, S.O.R./99-256
Canada Corporations Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-32
Special Acts of Parliament incorporating specific companies

Description:

Investment
1. The Canada Business Corporations Act requires, for most
federally incorporated corporations, that 25 per cent of
directors be resident Canadians and, if such corporations
have fewer than four directors, at least one director must be a
resident Canadian. As provided in the Canada Business
Corporations Regulations, 2001, a simple majority of
resident Canadian directors is required for corporations in
the following sectors: uranium mining; book publishing or
distribution; book sales, if the sale of books is the primary
part of the corporation’s business; and film or video
distribution. Similarly, corporations that, by an Act of
Parliament or Regulation, are individually subject to
minimum Canadian ownership requirements are required to
have a majority of resident Canadian directors.
2. For the purposes of the Canada Business Corporations Act,
resident Canadian means an individual who is a Canadian
citizen ordinarily resident in Canada, a Canadian citizen who
is not ordinarily resident in Canada who is a member of a
class set out in the Canada Business Corporations
Regulations, 2001, or a “permanent resident” as defined in
the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c.
27, other than a permanent resident who has been ordinarily
resident in Canada for more than one year after becoming
eligible to apply for Canadian citizenship.

737

3. In the case of a holding corporation, not more than one-third
of the directors need to be resident Canadians if the earnings
in Canada of the holding corporation and its subsidiaries are
less than five per cent of the gross earnings of the holding
corporation and its subsidiaries.
4. The Canada Cooperatives Act requires that not less than
two-thirds of the directors be members of the cooperative. At
least 25 per cent of directors of a cooperative must be
resident in Canada; if a cooperative has only three directors,
at least one director must be resident in Canada.
5. For the purposes of the Canada Cooperatives Act, a resident
of Canada is defined in the Canada Cooperatives
Regulations as an individual who is a Canadian citizen and
who is ordinarily resident in Canada; a Canadian citizen who
is not ordinarily resident in Canada and who is a member of
a class set out in the Canada Cooperatives Regulations, or a
“permanent resident” as defined in the Immigration and
Refugee Protection Act, other than a permanent resident who
has been ordinarily resident in Canada for more than one
year after becoming eligible to apply for Canadian
citizenship.

738

Reservation I-C-5
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Citizenship Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29
Foreign Ownership of Land Regulations, S.O.R./79-416

Description:

Investment
1. The Foreign Ownership of Land Regulations are made
pursuant to the Citizenship Act and the Agricultural and
Recreational Land Ownership Act, R.S.A. 1980, c. A-9. In
Alberta, an ineligible person or foreign owned or controlled
corporation may only hold an interest in controlled land
consisting of a maximum of two parcels containing, in the
aggregate, a maximum of 20 acres.
2. For the purposes of this reservation:
ineligible person means:
(a) a natural person who is not a Canadian citizen or
permanent resident;
(b) a foreign government or foreign government agency; or
(c) a corporation incorporated in a country other than
Canada; and
controlled land means land in Alberta, but does not include:
(a) land of the Crown in right of Alberta;
(b) land within a city, town, new town, village or summer
village; and
(c) mines or minerals.

739

Reservation I-C-6
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Air Canada Public Participation Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 35 (4th
Supp.)
Canadian Arsenals Limited Divestiture Authorization Act, S.C.
1986, c. 20
Eldorado Nuclear Limited Reorganization and Divestiture Act,
S.C. 1988, c. 41
Nordion and Theratronics Divestiture Authorization Act, S.C.
1990, c. 4

Description:

Investment
1.

A “non-resident” or “non-residents” may not own more than
a specified percentage of the voting shares of the corporation
to which each Act applies. For some companies the
restrictions apply to individual shareholders, while for others
the restrictions may apply in the aggregate. If there are limits
on the percentage that an individual Canadian investor can
own, these limits also apply to non-residents. The
restrictions are as follows:
Air Canada: 25 per cent in the aggregate;
Cameco Limited (formerly Eldorado Nuclear Limited): 15
per cent per non-resident natural person, 25 per cent in the
aggregate;
Nordion International Inc.: 25 per cent in the aggregate;
Theratronics International Limited: 49 per cent in the
aggregate; and
Canadian Arsenals Limited: 25 per cent in the aggregate.

2.

For the purposes of this reservation, non-resident includes:
(a) a natural person who is not a Canadian citizen and not
ordinarily resident in Canada;
(b) a corporation incorporated, formed or otherwise
organised outside Canada;

740

(c) the government of a foreign State or a political
subdivision of a government of a foreign State, or a
person empowered to perform a function or duty on
behalf of such a government;
(d) a corporation that is controlled directly or indirectly by a
person or an entity referred to in subparagraphs (a)
through (c);
(e) a trust:
(i)

(ii)

established by a person or an entity referred to in
subparagraphs (b) through (d), other than a trust
for the administration of a pension fund for the
benefit of natural persons the majority of whom
are resident in Canada; or
in which a person or an entity referred to in
subparagraphs (a) through (d) has more than 50
per cent of the beneficial interest; and

(f) a corporation that is controlled directly or indirectly by a
trust referred to in sub-paragraph (e).

741

Reservation I-C-7
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Export and Import Permits Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-19

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a natural person ordinarily resident in Canada, an enterprise
with its head office in Canada or a branch office in Canada of a
foreign enterprise may apply for and be issued an import or
export permit or transit authorisation certificate for a good or
related service subject to controls under the Export and Import
Permits Act.

742

Reservation I-C-8
Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:
Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment
1.

Canada reserves the right to maintain a measure with respect
to the provision of social services not otherwise reserved
under its Reservation II-C-9 in respect of social services.

2. This reservation against most-favoured-nation treatment
does not apply to the provision of private education services.

743

Reservation I-C-9
Sector:

Communication services

Sub-Sector:

Telecommunications transport networks and services
radiocommunications

Industry Classification:

CPC 752

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Telecommunications Act, S.C. 1993, c. 38
Canadian Telecommunications Common Carrier Ownership and
Control Regulations, S.O.R./94-667
Radiocommunications Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. R-2
Radiocommunication Regulations, S.O.R./96-484

Description:

Investment
1. Foreign investment in facilities-based telecommunications
service suppliers is restricted to a maximum, cumulative
total of 46.7 per cent voting interest, based on 20 per cent
direct investment and 33.3 per cent indirect investment.
2. Facilities-based telecommunications service suppliers must
be controlled in fact by Canadians.
3. At least 80 per cent of the members of the board of directors
of facilities-based telecommunications service suppliers
must be Canadians.
4. Notwithstanding the restrictions described above:
(a) foreign investment is allowed up to 100 per cent for
suppliers conducting operations under an international
submarine cable licence;
(b) mobile satellite systems of a foreign service supplier
may be used by a Canadian service supplier to provide
services in Canada;
(c) fixed satellite systems of a foreign service supplier may
be used to provide services between points in Canada
and all points outside Canada;

744

(d) foreign investment is allowed up to 100 per cent for
suppliers conducting operations under a satellite
authorisation; and
(e) foreign investment is allowed up to 100 per cent for
facilities-based telecommunications service suppliers
that have revenues, including those of its affiliates, from
the supply of telecommunications services in Canada
representing less than 10 per cent of the total
telecommunications services revenues in Canada.

745

Reservation I-C-10
Sector:

Transport services

Sub-Sector:

Customs brokers
Other supporting and auxiliary transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 749

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Customs Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.)
Customs Brokers Licensing Regulations, S.O.R./86-1067

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
To be a licenced customs broker in Canada:
(a) a natural person must be a Canadian national;
(b) a corporation must be incorporated in Canada with a
majority of its directors being Canadian nationals; and
(c) a partnership must be composed of persons who are
Canadian nationals, or corporations incorporated in
Canada with a majority of their directors being
Canadian nationals.

746

Reservation I-C-11
Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Duty free shops

Industry Classification:

CPC 631, 632 (limited to duty-free shops)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Customs Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp.)
Duty Free Shop Regulations, S.O.R./86-1072

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. To be a licenced duty free shop operator at a land border
crossing in Canada, a natural person must:
(a) be a Canadian national;
(b) be of good character;
(c) be principally resident in Canada; and
(d) have resided in Canada for at least 183 days of the year
preceding the year of application for the licence.
2. To be a licenced duty free shop operator at a land border
crossing in Canada, a corporation must:
(a) be incorporated in Canada; and
(b) have all of its shares beneficially owned by Canadian
nationals who meet the requirements of paragraph 1.

747

Reservation I-C-12
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Examination services relating to the export and import of
cultural property
Museum services except for historical sites and buildings
(limited to cultural property examination services)

Industry Classification:

CPC 96321, 87909 (limited to cultural property examination
services)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Cultural Property Export and Import Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-51

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only a resident of Canada or an institution in Canada may be
designated as an expert examiner of cultural property for the
purposes of the Cultural Property Export and Import Act.

2.

For the purposes of this reservation:

(a) institution means an entity that is publicly owned and
operated solely for the benefit of the public, that is
established for educational or cultural purposes and that
conserves objects and exhibits them; and
(b) resident of Canada means a natural person who is
ordinarily resident in Canada, or a corporation that has its
head office in Canada or maintains an establishment in
Canada to which employees employed in connection with
the business of the corporation ordinarily report for work.

748

Reservation I-C-13
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Patent agents
Patent agents providing legal advisory and representation
services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8921

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Patent Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4
Patent Rules, S.O.R./96-423

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To represent a person in the prosecution of a patent application
or in other business before the Patent Office, a patent agent must
be resident in Canada and registered by the Patent Office.

749

Reservation I-C-14
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Trade-mark agents
Trade-mark agents providing legal advisory and representation
services in statutory procedures

Industry Classification:

CPC 8922

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Trade-marks Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13
Trade-marks Regulations, S.O.R./96-195

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To represent a person in the prosecution of an application for a
trade-mark or in other business before the Trade-marks Office, a
trade-mark agent must be resident in Canada and registered by
the Trade-marks Office.

750

Reservation I-C-15
Sector:

Energy (oil and gas)

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas industries
Services incidental to mining

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 883

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Canada Petroleum Resources Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 36 (2nd
Supp.)
Territorial Lands Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-7
Federal Real Property and Federal Immovables Act, S.C. 1991,
c. 50
Canada-Newfoundland Atlantic Accord Implementation Act,
S.C. 1987, c. 3
Canada-Nova Scotia Offshore Petroleum Resources Accord
Implementation Act, S.C. 1988, c. 28

Description:

Investment
1. This reservation applies to production licences issued for
“frontier lands” and “offshore areas” (areas not under
provincial jurisdiction) as defined in the applicable
measures.
2. A person who holds an oil and gas production licence or
shares therein must be a corporation incorporated in Canada.

751

Reservation I-C-16
Sector:

Energy (oil and gas)

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas industries
Services incidental to mining

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 883

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Canada Oil and Gas Production and Conservation Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. O-7, as amended by the Canada Oil and Gas
Operations Act, S.C. 1992, c. 35
Canada - Nova Scotia Offshore Petroleum Resources Accord
Implementation Act, S.C. 1988, c. 28
Canada - Newfoundland Atlantic Accord Implementation Act,
S.C. 1987, c. 3
Measures implementing the Canada-Yukon Oil and Gas Accord,
including the Canada-Yukon Oil and Gas Accord
Implementation Act, 1998, c.5, s. 20 and the Oil and Gas Act,
RSY 2002, c. 162
Measures implementing the Northwest Territories Oil and Gas
Accord, including implementing measures that apply to or are
adopted by Nunavut as the successor territories to the former
Northwest Territories
Measures implementing the Canada-Quebec Gulf of St.
Lawrence Petroleum Resources Accord

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. Under the Canada Oil and Gas Operations Act, a “benefits
plan” must be approved by the Minister in order to be
authorised to proceed with an oil and gas development
project.
2. A benefits plan means a plan for the employment of
Canadians and for providing Canadian manufacturers,
consultants, contractors and service companies with a full
and fair opportunity to participate on a competitive basis in
the supply of goods and services used in proposed work or
activity referred to in the benefits plan.
3. The benefits plan contemplated by the Canada Oil and Gas
Operations Act permits the Minister to impose on the

752

applicant an additional requirement to ensure that
disadvantaged individuals or groups have access to training
and employment opportunities or can participate in the
supply of goods and services used in proposed work referred
to in the benefits plan.
4. Provisions continuing those set out in the Canada Oil and
Gas Operations Act are included in laws which implement
the Canada-Yukon Oil and Gas Accord.
5. Provisions continuing those set out in the Canada Oil and
Gas Operations Act will be included in laws or regulations
to implement accords with various provinces and territories,
including implementing legislation by provinces and
territories (for example, the Northwest Territories Oil and
Gas Accord, the Canada-Quebec Gulf of St. Lawrence
Petroleum Resources Accord, and the New Brunswick Oil
and Gas Accord). For the purposes of this reservation these
accords and implementing legislation shall be deemed, once
concluded, to be existing measures.
6. The Canada-Nova Scotia Offshore Petroleum Resources
Accord Implementation Act and the Canada-Newfoundland
Atlantic Accord Implementation Act have the same
requirement for a benefits plan but also require that the
benefits plan ensures that:
(a) the corporation or other body submitting the plan
establishes in the applicable province an office
where appropriate levels of decision-making are to
take place, prior to carrying out work or an activity
in the offshore area;
(b) expenditures be made for research and development
to be carried out in the province, and for education
and training to be provided in the province; and
(c) first consideration be given to goods produced or
services provided from within the province, where
those goods or services are competitive in terms of
fair market price, quality and delivery.
7. The Boards administering the benefits plan under these Acts
may also require that the plan include provisions to ensure
that disadvantaged individuals or groups, or corporations
owned or cooperatives operated by them, participate in the
supply of goods and services used in proposed work or
activity referred to in the plan.
753

8. In addition, Canada may impose a requirement or enforce a
commitment or undertaking for the transfer of technology, a
production process or other proprietary knowledge to a
person of Canada in connection with the approval of
development projects under the applicable Acts.

754

Reservation I-C-17
Sector:

Energy (oil and gas)

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas industries
Services incidental to mining

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 883

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Canada-Newfoundland Atlantic Accord Implementation Act,
S.C. 1987, c. 3
Hibernia Development Project Act, S.C. 1990, c. 41

Description:

Investment
1.

Under the Hibernia Development Project Act, Canada and
the Hibernia Project Owners may enter into agreements.
Those agreements may require the Project Owners to
undertake to perform certain work in Canada and
Newfoundland and to use their best efforts to achieve
specific Canadian and Newfoundland target levels in relation
to the provisions of a “benefits plan” required under the
Canada-Newfoundland Atlantic Accord Implementation Act.
“Benefits plans” are further described in Canada's
Reservation I-C-16.

2.

In addition, Canada may, in connection with the Hibernia
Project, impose a requirement or enforce a commitment or
undertaking for the transfer of technology, a production
process or other proprietary knowledge to a national or
enterprise in Canada.

755

Reservation I-C-18
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Uranium mines
Services incidental to mining

Industry Classification:

CPC 883

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Investment Canada Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 28 (1st Supp.)
Investment Canada Regulations, S.O.R./85-611
Non-Resident Ownership Policy in the Uranium Mining Sector,
1987

Description:

Investment
1.

Ownership by “non-Canadians”, as defined in the Investment
Canada Act, of a uranium mining property is limited to 49
per cent at the stage of first production. Exceptions to this
limit may be permitted if it can be established that the
property is in fact “Canadian controlled”, as defined in the
Investment Canada Act.

2.

Exemptions from the Non-Resident Ownership Policy in the
Uranium Mining Sector are permitted, subject to approval of
the Governor in Council, only in cases where Canadian
participants in the ownership of the property are not
available. Investments in properties by non-Canadians, made
prior to December 23, 1987 and that are beyond the
permitted ownership level, may remain in place. No increase
in non-Canadian ownership is permitted.

3.

In considering a request for an exemption from the Policy
from an investor of the European Union, Canada will not
require that it be demonstrated that a Canadian partner
cannot be found.

756

Reservation I-C-19
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c. 46
Insurance Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c. 47
Cooperative Credit Associations Act, S.C. 1991, c. 48
Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c. 45

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. Banks are required to have a firm of accountants to be
auditors of the bank. A firm of accountants must be qualified
as set out in the Bank Act. Among the qualifications required
is that two or more members of the firm must be ordinarily
resident in Canada and that the member of the firm jointly
designated by the firm and the bank to conduct the audit
must be ordinarily resident in Canada.
2. An insurance company, a cooperative credit association, and
a trust or loan company require an auditor who can either be
a natural person or a firm of accountants. An auditor of such
an institution must be qualified as set out in the Insurance
Companies Act, the Cooperative Credit Associations Act or
the Trust and Loan Companies Act. If a natural person is
appointed to be the auditor of such a financial institution,
among the qualifications required is that the person must be
ordinarily resident in Canada. If a firm of accountants is
appointed to be the auditor of such a financial institution, the
member of the firm jointly designated by the firm and the
financial institution to conduct the audit must be ordinarily
resident in Canada.

757

Reservation I-C-20
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Air transport services (passenger and freight)
“Specialty air services” (as set out in the Description element
below)
Courier services

Industry Classification:

CPC 73, 7512, “specialty air services” (as set out in the
Description element below)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and board of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Canada Transportation Act, S.C. 1996, c. 10
Aeronautics Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-2
Canadian Aviation Regulations, S.O.R./96-433:
Part II, Subpart 2 - “Aircraft Markings and Registration”;
Part IV “Personnel Licensing and Training”; and
Part VII “Commercial Air Services”

Description:

Investment
1. The Canada Transportation Act, in section 55, defines
“Canadian” in the following manner:
2. “... ‘Canadian’ means a Canadian citizen or a permanent
resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, a government in
Canada or an agent of such a government or a corporation or
other entity that is incorporated or formed under the laws of
Canada or a province, that is controlled in fact by Canadians
and of which at least seventy-five per cent, or such lesser
percentage as the Governor in Council may by regulation
specify, of the voting interests are owned and controlled by
Canadians…”
3. Regulations made under the Aeronautics Act incorporate by
reference the definition of “Canadian” found in the Canada
Transportation Act. These Regulations require that a
Canadian operator of commercial air services operate
Canadian-registered aircraft. These Regulations require an
operator to be Canadian in order to obtain a Canadian Air
Operator Certificate and to qualify to register aircraft as
758

“Canadian”.
4. Only Canadians may provide the following commercial air
transportation services:
(a) domestic services (air services between points, or from
and to the same point, in the territory of Canada, or
between a point in the territory of Canada and a point
not in the territory of another country);
(b) scheduled international services (scheduled air services
between a point in the territory of Canada and a point in
the territory of another country) where those services
have been reserved to Canadian carriers under existing
or future air services agreements;
(c) non-scheduled international services (non-scheduled air
services between a point in the territory of Canada and a
point in the territory of another country) where those
services have been reserved to Canadian carriers under
the Canada Transportation Act; and
(d) specialty air services include aerial mapping, aerial
surveying, aerial photography, forest fire management,
fire-fighting, aerial advertising, glider towing, parachute
jumping, aerial construction, heli-logging, aerial
inspection, aerial surveillance, flight training, aerial
sightseeing and aerial crop spraying.
5. No foreign individual is qualified to be the registered owner
of a Canadian-registered aircraft.
6. Further to the Canadian Aviation Regulations, a corporation
incorporated in Canada, but that does not meet the Canadian
ownership and control requirements, may only register an
aircraft for private use where a significant majority of use of
the aircraft (at least 60 per cent) is in Canada.
7. The Canadian Aviation Regulations also have the effect of
limiting foreign-registered private aircraft registered to nonCanadian corporations to be present in Canada for a
maximum of 90 days per twelve-month period. The foreignregistered private aircraft shall be limited to private use, as
would be the case for Canadian-registered aircraft requiring
a private operating certificate.

759

Reservation I-C-21
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Aircraft repair and maintenance services
Ground handling services (line maintenance only) as defined in
the Chapters on Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment

Industry Classification:

“Aircraft repair and maintenance services” and “ground handling
service” (line maintenance only), as defined in Articles 8.1
(Investment - Definitions) and 9.1 (Cross-Border Trade in
Services)

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Measures:

Aeronautics Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-2
Canadian Aviation Regulations, S.O.R./96-433:
Part IV “Personnel Licensing and Training”;
Part V “Airworthiness”;
Part VI “General Operating and Flight Rules”; and
Part VII “Commercial Air Services”

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Aircraft and other aeronautical product repair, overhaul or
maintenance activities (including line maintenance) required to
maintain the airworthiness of Canadian-registered aircraft and
other aeronautical products must be performed by persons
meeting Canadian aviation regulatory requirements (that is,
approved maintenance organisations and aircraft maintenance
engineers). Certifications are not provided for persons located
outside Canada, except sub-organisations of approved
maintenance organisations that are located in Canada.

760

Reservation I-C-22
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Scheduled and non-scheduled passenger and freight
transportation by road, including courier services.

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 7122, 7123, 7512

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Measures:

Motor Vehicle Transport Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 29 (3rd Supp.), as
amended by S.C. 2001, c. 13.
Canada Transportation Act, S.C. 1996, c. 10
Customs Tariff, S.C. 1997, c. 36

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only persons of Canada using Canadian-registered and either
Canadian-built or duty-paid trucks or buses, may provide truck
or bus services between points in the territory of Canada.

761

Reservation I-C-23
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport services (passengers and freight) by sea-going
and non-sea-going vessels
Supporting and other services for water transport, Construction
for waterways, harbors, dams and other water works
Any other commercial marine activity undertaken from a vessel

Industry Classification:

CPC 721, 722, 745, 5133, 5223, and any other commercial
marine activity undertaken from a vessel

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Obligations

Measures:

Canada Shipping Act, 2001, S.C. 2001, c. 26

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

1. To register a vessel in Canada, the owner of that vessel or
the person who has exclusive possession of that vessel must
be:
(a) a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident” within the
meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and
Refugee Protection Act,
(b) a corporation incorporated under the law of Canada or a
province or territory; or
(c) when the vessel is not already registered in another
country, a corporation incorporated under the laws of a
country other than Canada if one of the following is
acting with respect to all matters relating to the vessel,
namely:
(i) a subsidiary of the corporation that is
incorporated under the law of Canada or a
province or territory;
(ii) an employee or director in Canada of any
branch office of the corporation that is carrying
on business in Canada; or
762

(iii) a ship management company incorporated
under the law of Canada or a province or
territory.
2. A vessel registered in a foreign country which has been
bareboat chartered may be listed in Canada for the duration
of the charter while the vessel’s registration is suspended in
its country of registry, if the charterer is:
(a) a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, as defined in
subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act; or
(b) a corporation incorporated under the law of Canada or a
province or territory.

763

Reservation I-C-24
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport services (passengers and freight) by sea-going
and non-sea-going vessels
Supporting and other services for water transport, Construction
for waterways, harbors, dams and other water works
Any other commercial marine activity undertaken from a vessel

Industry Classification:

CPC 721, 722, 745, 5133, 5223, and any other commercial
marine activity undertaken from a vessel

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Obligations

Measures:

Canada Shipping Act, 2001, S.C. 2001, c. 26
Marine Personnel Regulations, S.O.R./2007-115

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services, and International Maritime
Transport Services
Masters, mates, engineers and certain other seafarers must hold a
certificate granted by the Minister of Transport as a requirement
of service on Canadian registered vessels. These certificates may
be granted only to Canadian citizens or permanent residents.

764

Reservation I-C-25
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Pilotage and berthing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 74520

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Obligations

Measures:

Pilotage Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-14
General Pilotage Regulations, S.O.R./2000-132
Atlantic Pilotage Authority Regulations, C.R.C. c. 1264
Laurentian Pilotage Authority Regulations, C.R.C. c. 1268
Great Lakes Pilotage Regulations, C.R.C. c. 1266
Pacific Pilotage Regulations, C.R.C. c. 1270

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services, and International Maritime
Transport Services
Subject to Canada's Reservation II-C-15, a licence or a pilotage
certificate issued by the relevant regional Pilotage Authority is
required to provide pilotage services in the compulsory pilotage
waters of the territory of Canada. Only a Canadian citizen or
permanent resident may obtain a licence or pilotage certificate. A
permanent resident of Canada who has been issued a pilot’s
licence or pilotage certificate must become a Canadian citizen
within five years of receipt of that licence or pilotage certificate
in order to retain it.

765

Reservation I-C-26
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transportation services by sea-going and non-sea-going vessels

Industry Classification:

CPC 721, 722

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment
Obligations

Measures:

Coasting Trade Act, S.C. 1992, c. 31

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services, and International Maritime
Transport Services
The prohibitions under the Coasting Trade Act, set out in
Canada's Reservation II-C-14, do not apply to any vessel that is
owned by the Government of the United States of America,
when used solely for the purpose of transporting goods owned by
the Government of the United States of America from the
territory of Canada to supply Distant Early Warning sites.

766

Reservation I-C-27
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Scheduled or non-scheduled passenger transportation by road

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 7122

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Measures:

Motor Vehicle Transport Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 29 (3rd Supp.), as
amended by S.C. 2001, c. 13

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Provincial agencies have been delegated authority to permit
persons to provide extra-provincial (inter-provincial and crossborder) bus services in their respective provinces and territories
on the same basis as local bus services. Most provincial agencies
permit the provision of local bus services on the basis of a public
convenience and necessity test.

767

Reservation I-C-28
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

All transportation sub-sectors

Industry Classification:

CPC 7

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Measures:

Canada Transportation Act, S.C. 1996, c. 10

Description:

Investment
Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act, any proposed
transaction that involves a transportation undertaking that raises
issues with respect to the public interest as it relates to national
transportation as determined by the Minister requires approval
by the Governor in Council.

768

Reservation I-C-29
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Postal services, mail transportation by any mode of transport.

Industry Classification:

CPC 71124, 71235, 7321, 7511

Level of Government:

National

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Measures:

Canada Post Corporation Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-10
Letter Definition Regulations, S.O.R./83-481

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The sole and exclusive privilege of collecting, transmitting and
delivering “letters” within Canada, as defined in the Letter
Definition Regulations is reserved for the postal monopoly.
For greater certainty, activities relating to the sole and exclusive
privilege may also be restricted, including the issuance of
postage stamps and the installation, erection or relocation in a
public place of a mail receptacle or device to be used for the
collection, delivery or storage of mail.

769

Schedule of Canada – Provincial and Territorial
Reservations applicable in Alberta
Reservation I-PT-1
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting
Auditing and bookkeeping services

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Regulated Accounting Profession Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. R-12
Certified General Accountants Regulation, Alta. Reg. 176/2001
Certified Management Accountants Regulation, Alta. Reg.
177/2001
Chartered Accountants Regulation, Alta. Reg. 178/2001

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
An applicant for registration as a regulated member must
provide proof of Canadian citizenship or proof of having been
lawfully admitted to and entitled to work in Canada. Each office
in Alberta of a registrant engaged in a public accounting practice
shall be under the personal charge and management of a member
who shall normally be accessible to meet the needs of clients
during such times as the office is open to the public.

770

Reservation I-PT-2
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Veterinary Profession Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. V-2
General Regulation, Alta. Reg. 44/86

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only Canadian citizens or persons lawfully admitted into and
entitled to work in Canada may be approved for registration by
the Registration Committee, upon production of satisfactory
evidence to this effect.

771

Reservation I-PT-3
Sector:

Real estate

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services involving own or leased property or on a fee
or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, 822, 81331

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Real Estate Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. R-5

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Service suppliers are authorised through a brokerage which must
maintain a registered business office in the Province. The
registered business office must be: the location from which the
person conducts business; under the control of the service
supplier; and the location of the records required to be
maintained by the Act.

772

Reservation I-PT-4
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Land surveying

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Land Surveyors Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. L-3

Description:

Investment
Services that are provided through a corporation, commercial
presence must take the form of a surveyor’s corporation.

773

Reservation I-PT-5
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 643, 88411

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Gaming and Liquor Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. G-1
Gaming and Liquor Regulation, Alta. Reg. 143/96
Alberta Gaming and Liquor Commission Board Policies

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit Alberta to control the manufacture,
import, sale, purchase, possession, storage, transportation, use
and consumption of liquor, including through permits and
licences that may include citizenship, residency and other
limitations on the establishment, operation and provision of these
activities.

774

Reservation I-PT-6
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Land
Services incidental to agriculture

Industry Classification:

CPC 8811 (other than rental of agricultural equipment with
operator), 531

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Provincial Parks Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. P-35
Provincial Parks (Dispositions) Regulations, Alta. Reg. 241/77
Provincial Parks (General) Regulation, Alta. Reg. 102/85
Dispositions and Fees Regulation, Alta. Reg. 54/2000
Special Areas Disposition Regulation, Alta. Reg. 137/2001
Declaration Regulation, Alta. Reg. 195/2001
Forest Reserves Regulation, Alta. Reg. 42/2005

Description:

Investment
Dispositions of Crown land, including within provincial parks
are limited to residents of Alberta who are Canadian citizens or
permanent residents within the meaning of the Immigration and
Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27.

775

Reservation I-PT-7
Sector:

Hunting

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting
Own-account hunting guides
Other cultural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 0297, 8813, 96419, 9633

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Wildlife Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. W-10
Wildlife Regulation, Alta. Reg. 143/97

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Citizenship or permanent residency requirements may be
imposed as a condition for designations, permits or licences
relating to guiding and outfitting for wildlife hunting.
Citizenship or permanent residency requirements may also be
imposed as a condition for permits or licences for zoo-keeping,
taxidermy, tanning, fur dealing or fur management.

776

Reservation I-PT-8
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport services
Passenger transportation

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 7122

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Motor Transport Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. M-21
Motor Vehicle Administration Act, R.S.A. 2000, M-23

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A public convenience and needs test may be imposed prior to
approving a licence to provide interurban bus transport and nonscheduled/scheduled services, including applying some or all of
the following criteria: adequacy of current levels of service;
market conditions establishing the requirement for expanded
service; effect of new entrants on public convenience, including
the continuity and quality of service, and the fitness, willingness
and ability of the applicant to provide proper service.

777

Reservation I-PT-9
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Industrial benefits policy

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Performance requirements may be imposed on applicants (such
as a first consideration being given to service suppliers from
within Alberta or Canada, if competitive in terms of price and
quality) in the case of all large scale projects requiring Industrial
Development, Forest Management, Oil Sands, Power Plant or
Gas Plant and Coal Development Permits.

778

Reservation I-PT-10
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. B-9
Business Corporations Regulation, Alta. Reg. 118/2000
Companies Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. C-21
Cooperatives Act, S.A. 2001, c. C-28.1
Partnership Amendment Act, R.S.A. 2000 (Supp.), c. P-25
Societies Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-14

Description:

Investment
1. At least 25 per cent of the directors of an Alberta corporation
must be resident Canadians.
2. For the purposes of these measures, “resident Canadian”
means an individual who is:
(a) a Canadian citizen ordinarily resident in Canada;
(b) a Canadian citizen, not ordinarily resident in Canada,
who is a member of a prescribed class of persons; or
(c) a permanent resident within the meaning of
the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001,
c. 27 and ordinarily resident in Canada.

779

Reservation I-PT-11
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Land Titles Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. L-4
Agricultural and Recreational Land Ownership Act, R.S.A.
2000, c. A-9
Regulations Respecting the Ownership of Agricultural and
Recreational Land in Alberta, Alta. Reg. 160/79
Public Lands Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. P-40

Description:

Investment
Public lands cannot be sold to:
(a) a person who is not a Canadian citizen or a permanent
resident as defined in the Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27;
(b) a corporation that is not a Canadian corporation; or
(c) a person or corporation acting as a trustee for a person
who is not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident as
defined in the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,
or for a corporation that is not a Canadian corporation.

780

Reservation I-PT-12
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Gaming and Liquor Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. G-1
Horse Racing Alberta Act, RSA 2000, c. H-11.3
Gaming and Liquor Regulation, Alta. Reg. 143/1996
Alberta Gaming and Liquor Commission Board Policies

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit Alberta to regulate and authorise
services, suppliers of services, manufacturing, suppliers of
materials, operations and repairs relating to lottery schemes,
gaming terminals, games of chance, races, bingo and casinos,
and similar activities including through permits and licences that
may include citizenship, residency and other limitations on the
establishment, operation and provision of these activities.

781

Reservation I-PT-13
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to animal husbandry

Industry Classification:

CPC 8812

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Stray Animals Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-20
Horse Capture Regulation, Alta. Reg. 59/94

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a Canadian citizen or a person lawfully admitted into
Canada for permanent residence may apply for, obtain or hold a
licence to capture, bait, chase, pursue, follow after or on the trail
of or stalk horses on public land in Alberta designated for the
licenced capture of horses.

782

Reservations applicable in British Columbia
Reservation I-PT-14
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products

Industry Classification:

CPC 03

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157

Description:

Investment
All timber harvested from provincial land must be either used in
the Province or manufactured within the Province into other
goods. However, the Province may authorise an exemption to
this requirement if the timber is surplus to the requirements of
processing facilities in the Province, if it cannot be processed
economically near the harvesting area and cannot be transported
economically to another facility in the Province, or if an
exemption would prevent waste or improve the utilisation of the
wood.

783

Reservation I-PT-15
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8611

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Evidence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 124

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A person must be a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident to
be appointed as a commissioner for taking affidavits.

784

Reservation I-PT-16
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Accountants (Certified General) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996. c. 2
Accountants (Chartered) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 3
Accountants (Management) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 4

Description:

Investment
Accounting offices must be under the management of a resident
of British Columbia.

785

Reservation I-PT-17
Sector:
Sub-Sector:

All sectors

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Cooperative Association Act, S.B.C. 1999, c. 28
Society Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 433

Description:

Investment
1. Under the Cooperative Association Act, the majority of
directors of an association incorporated under the Act must
be resident Canadians and at least one director must be
resident in the Province.
2. Under the Society Act, at least one director of a society
incorporated under the Act must be resident in the Province.

786

Reservation I-PT-18
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Lawyers and notaries

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Notaries Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 334

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Canada may
be certified as a notary public in British Columbia. The Notaries
Act puts limitations on the ability of notaries to provide services
through a notary corporation. Trust funds must be held by
regulated provincial or federal financial institutions.

787

Reservation I-PT-19
Sector:

Tourism

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting (hunting guides; outfitters; angling
guides)
Services incidental to fishing
Travel agency, tour operator and tourist guides

Industry Classification:

CPC 8813, 882, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Wildlife Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 488

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Canada are
eligible to be issued guide outfitter and angling guide licences.

788

Reservation I-PT-20
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Other professional services
Forestry and logging products
Services incidental to forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC Other, 03 , 8814

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Foresters Act, S.B.C. 2003, c. 19

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In order to obtain registration as a professional forester, at least
24 months of relevant work experience must first be gained in
British Columbia. In some cases, professional foresters already
registered in other Canadian jurisdictions are exempt from this
requirement.

789

Reservation I-PT-21
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to manufacturing
Christmas tree permits
Log salvage permits
Woodlot licences

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 8814

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157

Description:

Investment
1.

Only Canadian citizens, permanent residents, or a
corporation controlled by persons who are Canadian citizens
or permanent residents of Canada, may be granted a
Christmas tree permit.

2.

Only Canadian citizens or landed immigrants may apply for
log salvage permits.

3.

Only Canadian citizens, permanent residents, or a
corporation, other than a society, that is controlled by
persons who are Canadian citizens or permanent residents
may apply for woodlot licences.

4.

Proximity of private residence from the proposed woodlot
licence, and distance and size of private land to be included
in the proposed woodlot are two of the criteria used to award
a licence.

790

Reservation I-PT-22
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157

Description:

Investment
1. Only the following entities may enter into a community
forest agreement:
(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)
2.

A society incorporated under the Society Act, R.S.B.C.
1996, c.433;
An association as defined in the Cooperative
Association Act, S.B.C. 1999, c. 28;
A corporation, if the corporation is established by or
under an enactment, or registered as an extraprovincial company under the Business Corporations
Act, S.B.C. 2002, c. 57;
A partnership, if the partnership is comprised of
municipalities or regional districts, societies,
associations, companies or extra-provincial companies,
or a combination of the foregoing; or
A municipality or regional district.

Community forest agreements may be directly awarded.

791

Reservation I-PT-23
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Horticulture and market gardening
Services incidental to agriculture (other than rental of
agricultural equipment with operator)
Services incidental to animal husbandry

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 8811 (other than rental of agricultural equipment with
operator), 8812

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Range Act, S.B.C. 2004, c. 71

Description:

Investment
An applicant who can demonstrate local presence shall be given
preference in the granting of grazing licences and permits.

792

Reservation I-PT-24
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157

Description:

Investment
An applicant may be required to commit to the establishment of
a manufacturing facility to qualify for a forest licence.

793

Reservation I-PT-25
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157

Description:

Investment
The granting of a community salvage licence is limited to
specific groups, notably societies and cooperative associations,
for purposes such as providing social and economic benefits to
British Columbia, contributing to government revenues,
providing opportunities for achieving a range of community
objectives, including employment and other social,
environmental and economic benefits, encouraging cooperation
within the community and among stakeholders, providing for the
use of qualifying timber, and other factors that the Minister or a
person authorised by the Minister specifies in the invitation or
advertising.

794

Reservation I-PT-26
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Forest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 157

Description:

Investment
Only a limited number of restricted forest licences are granted.
The granting of such licences may be subject to performance
requirements, including the requirement to own or lease
processing facilities in the Province.

795

Reservation I-PT-27
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Land Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 245
Ministry of Forest and Range Policy - Grazing Lease Policy
dated November 15, 2004

Description:

Investment
1. The Land Act restricts Crown grants to Canadian citizens
and to permanent residents. Crown land may also be granted
in some circumstances to a government corporation,
municipality, regional district, hospital board, university,
college, board of education, francophone education authority
as defined in the School Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 412, other
government related body or to the South Coast British
Columbia Transportation Authority continued under the
South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Act,
S.B.C. 1998, c. 30, or any of its subsidiaries.
2.

Only Canadian citizens may hold grazing lease tenures.
Performance requirements are imposed on companies as a
condition for the granting of grazing lease tenures.

796

Reservation I-PT-28
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Services incidental to fishing
Land

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 531, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Fisheries Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 149
Land Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 245

Description:

Investment
Only a citizen or permanent resident of Canada is entitled to a
Crown grant for aquaculture operations, unless the person’s
application for a disposition of Crown land was allowed prior to
May 1, 1970.

797

Reservation I-PT-29
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to fishing
Wholesale trade services

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62112, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Fisheries Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 149
Commercial Fisheries and Mariculture: A Policy for the 1980s

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency, citizenship and performance requirements may be
imposed as a condition of licensing to undertake the harvesting
of fish, marine plants or wild oysters, or to undertake fish
processing, buying or brokering. Offshore processing or
processing at sea is limited to fishermen who process their own
catches and if the fish species cannot be economically
processed in existing shore based facilities.

798

Reservation I-PT-30
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport services
Passenger transportation

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 7122

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Passenger Transportation Act, S.B.C. 2004, c. 39
Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318

Description:

Investment
1. The Passenger Transportation Act requires a person to
obtain a passenger transportation licence from the
Passenger Transportation Board to provide taxi or intercity
bus services in British Columbia. The Board may approve
an application for a licence if the Board considers that:
(a)

there is a public need for the service;

(b)

the applicant is “fit and proper” and capable of
providing the service; and

(c)

the application, if granted, would promote sound
economic conditions in the passenger transportation
business in British Columbia.

2. The Passenger Transportation Board has the power to
impose terms and conditions on a licence. If the licence is
to include an authorisation to operate motor vehicles as
intercity buses, the terms and conditions of the licence
include routes and minimum route frequencies for that
operation. If the licence is to include an authorisation to
operate motor vehicles as passenger directed vehicles (such
as taxis and limousines), the terms and conditions of the
licence include fleet size, rates and geographic operating
area.

799

Reservation I-PT-31
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport services: public transit

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 7122

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

British Columbia Transit Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 38
South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Act,
S.B.C. 1998, c. 30

Description:

Investment
1. British Columbia Transit is a Crown corporation with the
exclusive authority to plan, acquire, and construct public
passenger transportation systems that support regional
growth strategies, official community plans and the
economic development of the transit service areas in all
areas of British Columbia, except the transportation service
region supported by the South Coast British Columbia
Transportation Authority.
2. The South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority
has exclusive authority to provide a regional transportation
system for all municipalities and rural areas located in the
Greater Vancouver Regional District that moves people and
goods, and supports the regional growth strategy, provincial
and regional environmental objectives (including air quality
and greenhouse gas emission reduction objectives), and the
economic development of the transportation service region.

800

Reservation I-PT-32
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

BC Hydro Public Power Legacy and Heritage Contract Act,
S.B.C. 2003. c. 86
Clean Energy Act, S.B.C. 2010, c. 22
Utilities Commission Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 473
Hydro and Power Authority Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 212

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

In British Columbia, electric utilities operate as regulated
monopoly distributors of electricity within the area they
service.

2.

British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority (“BC Hydro”)
is a Crown corporation that owns most of the generation,
transmission and distribution facilities in British Columbia.
BC Hydro receives differential treatment under provincial
law and is exempted from British Columbia Utilities
Commission review in some instances. BC Hydro is
prohibited from disposing of (including by way of sale) any
of its heritage assets, unless they are no longer used or
useful.

3.

Subject to direction from the Lieutenant Governor in
Council, rates for the sale of electricity within the Province
are regulated by the British Columbia Utilities Commission.

801

Reservation I-PT-33
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Free miner

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Mineral Tenure Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 292

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To obtain a free miner certificate a person must be a resident of
Canada for at least 183 days in each calendar year, or be
authorised to work in Canada, or be a Canadian corporation or a
partnership consisting of qualified individuals or Canadian
corporations.

802

Reservations applicable in Manitoba
Reservation I-PT-34
Sector:

Community and personal services

Sub-Sector:

Funeral
Cremation and undertaking services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9703

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Prearranged Funeral Services Act, C.C.S.M. c. F-200

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Anyone supplying prearranged funeral plans, on a for-profit
basis, must have a licence. Only a person who regularly carries
on the business of supplying funeral services and maintains an
establishment in Manitoba for this purpose may apply for such a
licence. Prearranged funeral plans can only be offered through
the establishment associated with the licence.

803

Reservation I-PT-35
Sector:

Service of membership organizations

Sub-Sector:

Legal documentation and certification

Industry Classification:

CPC 8613, 95910

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Marriage Act, C.C.S.M. c. M-50
Policy Respecting Residency or Citizenship of Appointees

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Under The Marriage Act, the Minister responsible may appoint a
person as a marriage commissioner for the Province, or any part
thereof specified by the Minister, and that person may solemnize
ceremonies of marriage in accordance with the tenor of the
appointment. The Minister may afford preferential treatment to
Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Manitoba.

804

Reservation I-PT-36
Sector:

Education

Sub-Sector:

Other education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9290

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Manitoba Registered Music Teachers’ Association
Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990, c. 100

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
No person may be admitted as a member of the Manitoba
Registered Music Teachers’ Association and thus use the title
“Registered Music Teacher”, unless that person can demonstrate
six months’ prior residence in Manitoba.

805

Reservation I-PT-37
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Community Development Bonds Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-160

Description:

Investment
1. All directors of a community development bond corporation
must be residents of Manitoba. Incorporators of the
corporation must be residents of the municipality in which
the corporation’s head office is located or of a municipality
nearby.
2. If the Government of Manitoba has provided a guarantee of
the bond, only eligible bondholders may call on the
guarantee. Eligible bondholders are those with a connection
to Manitoba or Canada when they purchased the bond: for
example, individuals resident in Manitoba, a Manitoba
corporation established under the Canada Business
Corporations Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-44, a corporation with
a head office in Manitoba, a trust if the majority of trustees
or beneficiaries are residents in Manitoba, or a Manitoba
municipality.
3. The proceeds raised from the issue of community
development bonds must be invested in “eligible
businesses”. These are corporations or co-operatives:
(a) incorporated under The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M., c.
C225 or the Canada Business Corporations Act or The
Co-operatives Act, C.C.S.M., c. C223, as the case may
be;
(b) that carry on or are about to carry on business, on a forprofit basis, in Manitoba; and
(c) the Manitoba assets of which are (or will be, when the
entity commences business) be controlled by persons
resident in Manitoba (among other tests not involving a

806

Manitoba presence or control or ownership by Manitoba
residents).

807

Reservation I-PT-38
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land
Forest and other wooded land

Industry Classification:

CPC 531

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Farm Lands Ownership Act, C.C.S.M. c. F-35

Description:

Investment
Only individuals who are citizens of Canada or permanent
residents of Canada within the meaning of the Immigration and
Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (“eligible individuals”),
corporations, trusts, partnerships or other business entities
entirely owned by active or retired farmers or eligible
individuals, or a combination of these, governments (municipal
and provincial) or government agencies, or qualified immigrants
who are entitled and intend to become eligible individuals within
two years after acquiring the farm land, may own more than 40
acres of Manitoba farmland.

808

Reservation I-PT-39
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act,
C.C.S.M. c. L-12
The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-225

Description:

Investment
1.

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations are
required to invest in active businesses (with assets valued
at less than CAD $50 million) of which at least 50 per cent
of the full-time employees are employees employed in
Manitoba, or if at least 50 per cent of employees’ wages
and salaries are attributable to services rendered in
Manitoba by the employees.

2.

The corporations must be registered under the Act, and
only corporations that have been incorporated under The
Corporations Act may apply to be registered. This means
that at least 25 per cent of the corporation’s directors must
be residents of Canada (or at least one, where there are
three or fewer directors), pursuant to The Corporations Act.

809

Reservation I-PT-40
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Cooperatives Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-223

Description:

Investment
A majority of directors of a cooperative must be resident in
Canada. For a directors’ meeting of a co-operative to be properly
constituted, a majority of the directors at the meeting must be
residents in Canada. A director who is a resident of Canada but
not present at the meeting can approve the business transacted at
a meeting, if the requisite majority would have been present had
that director been present. The managing director of a cooperative must be resident in Canada.

810

Reservation I-PT-41
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land
Forest and other wooded land
Crown land leases and permits
Services incidental to agriculture
Services incidental to animal husbandry

Industry Classification:

CPC 531, 8811 (other than rental of agricultural equipment with
operator), 8812

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Crown Lands Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-340
Agricultural Crown Land Leases Regulation, 168/2001
Agricultural Crown Land Grazing and Hay Permits Regulation,
288/88

Description:

Investment
1.

To be eligible to obtain a forage lease of agricultural Crown
lands, the tenant must be a Canadian citizen or have landed
Canadian immigrant status, and a resident of Manitoba. If
the tenant is a partnership or forage co-operative, every
partner or member, as the case may be, must be a Canadian
citizen or have landed Canadian immigrant status and must
be a resident of Manitoba. If the tenant is a corporation,
every shareholder must be a Canadian citizen or have landed
Canadian immigrant status, and be a resident of Manitoba,
and the corporation must be registered to carry on business
in Manitoba.

2.

A grazing permit or hay permit on agricultural Crown lands
may only be granted to a person who is ordinarily resident in
or near where the land described in the permit is situated.

811

Reservation I-PT-42
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land
Forest and other wooded land
Recreational and other open land

Industry Classification:

CPC 531, 533

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Crown Lands Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-340
Policy respecting allocation, sale and lease of cottage lots and
development of commercial establishments in provincial parks
and on other Crown land

Description:

Investment
The Minister may afford preferential treatment to Manitoba
residents over non-residents in the allocation, sale and lease of
cottage lots and development of commercial establishments in
provincial parks and on other Crown land.

812

Reservation I-PT-43
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to fishing
Wholesale trade services

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Fisheries Act, C.C.S.M. c. F-90
Fishing Licensing Regulation, Man. Reg. 124/97
Policy respecting the allocation of commercial fishing licences

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Unless otherwise authorised by regulation or by the
Freshwater
Fish
Marketing
Corporation
(the
“Corporation”), or in certain limited circumstances, no
person is permitted to sell or purchase fish caught in
Manitoba for delivery in Manitoba except through the
Corporation.

2.

The Minister has full discretion to issue commercial fishing
licences and to place conditions on the licences. The current
Policy specifies that commercial fishing licences are to be
allocated, re-allocated and renewed according to the value of
the benefits generated, in order of priority, to:
(a) local;
(b) regional; and
(c) provincial economies.

813

Reservation I-PT-44
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Land surveyors

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Land Surveyors Act, C.C.S.M. c. L-60

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

A “Manitoba land surveyor” must be a natural person.
Manitoba land surveyors are not permitted to provide land
surveying services through a corporation. Commercial
presence of a Manitoba land surveyor must take the form of
a sole proprietorship or partnership.

2.

A surveyor who practiced land surveying in Manitoba and
subsequently became the citizen or subject of a foreign
country must be re-naturalised in accordance with the
provisions of the Citizenship Act R.S.C., 1985, c. C-29 prior
to resuming practice in Manitoba.

814

Reservation I-PT-45
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal advisory and representation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8612

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Legal Profession Act, C.C.S.M. c. L-107

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of legal services to the public in Manitoba,
concerning Manitoba laws, by inter-jurisdictional law firms is
permissible only if, among other things, the firm maintains an
office in Manitoba and in at least one other Canadian or foreign
jurisdiction, and if at least one member of the firm is entitled to,
and does, practice law principally in Manitoba.

815

Reservation I-PT-46
Sector:

Wholesale trade

Sub-Sector:

Pharmaceutical and medical goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 62251

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Hearing Aid Act, C.C.S.M. c. H-38

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Hearing Aid Board has the authority to certify hearing aid
dealers and to prescribe preferential access to, and preferential
conditions on, applicants for certification resident in Manitoba or
Canada.

816

Reservation I-PT-47
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Passenger transit systems

Industry Classification:

CPC 71213, 71223

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Highway Traffic Act, C.C.S.M. c. H-60

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Manitoba Transport Board may limit the number of
certificates granted to public passenger motor carriers on public
roads in Manitoba. The Board may limit new public passenger
motor carriers from entering the public service vehicle market or
require motor carriers to take on less profitable routes if it
considers public availability of the service to be essential.

817

Reservation I-PT-48
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Chartered Accountants Act; C.C.S.M. c. C-70
The Certified General Accountants Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-46
The Certified Management Accountants Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-46.1
The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-225

Description:

Investment
The first three Acts cited above indicate that an accounting,
auditing, and bookkeeping corporation cannot be issued a
corporate permit to offer services in Manitoba, unless
incorporated under The Corporations Act. This means that at
least 25 per cent of the corporation’s directors must be residents
of Canada (or at least one, if there are three or fewer directors).

818

Reservation I-PT-49
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8621

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Chartered Accountants Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-70
The Certified General Accountants Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-46
The Certified Management Accountants Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-46.1
The Addictions Foundation Act, C.C.S.M. c.A-60
The Convention Centre Act, S.M. 1988-89 c. 39 amended
The Crown Corporations Public Review and Accountability Act,
C.C.S.M. c. C-336 amended
The Insurance Act, C.C.S.M. c. 140
The Municipal Act, C.C.S.M. c. M-225
The Northern Affairs Act, C.C.S.M. c. N-100 amended
The Public Schools Act, C.C.S.M c. P-250 amended
The Trustee Act, C.C.S.M c. T-160 amended
The City of Winnipeg Charter, S.M. 2002, c. 39 amended
The Concordia Hospital Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990, c. 39
The Hudson Bay Mining Employees’ Health Association
Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990, c. 68
The Investors Syndicate Limited Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990,
c. 77
The Mount Carmel Clinic Act, R.S.M. 1990, c. 120
L’Œuvre des bourses du Collège de Saint-Boniface
Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990, c. 132
The Seven Oaks General Hospital Incorporation Act, R.S.M.
1990, c. 180
The United Health Services Corporation Incorporation Act,
R.S.M. 1990, c. 201
The Winnipeg Art Gallery Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990, c.
216
The Winnipeg Clinic Incorporation Act, R.S.M. 1990, c. 220

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above listed Acts require that auditing services be performed
by a person who is authorised to practice as an accountant under
either The Chartered Accountants Act, The Certified General
Accountants Act or The Certified Management Accountants Act.

819

Reservation I-PT-50
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-225

Description:

Investment
At least 25 per cent of a corporation’s directors must be residents
of Canada (or at least one, if there are three or fewer directors).
Directors must not transact business at a meeting of directors
unless at least 25 per cent of the directors present are residents of
Canada (or if there are only three directors, at least one of the
directors present is a resident of Canada). If the directors
delegate any of their powers to a managing director or to a
committee, the managing director or a majority of the members
of the committee, as the case may be, must be a resident or
residents of Canada.

820

Reservation I-PT-51
Sector:

Hunting

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting
Hunting, fishing and trapping industries
Tourist guide agencies
Own-account hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472, 8813, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Wildlife Act, C.C.S.M. c. W-130
Allocation of Hunting Licences Regulation, Man. Reg. 77/2006
Captive Wild Animal Regulation, Man. Reg. 23/98
Exotic Wildlife Regulation, Man. Reg. 78/99
General Hunting Regulation, Man. Reg. 351/87
Hunting Dogs Regulation, Man. Reg. 79/95
Hunting Seasons and Bag Limits Regulation, Man. Reg. 165/91
Miscellaneous Licences and Permits Regulation, Man. Reg.
53/2007
Trapping Areas and Zones Regulation, Man. Reg. 149/2001
Hunting Guides Regulation, Man. Reg. 110/93
Manitoba Trapping Guide 2011/2012
The Resource Tourism Operators Act, C.C.S.M. c. R119.5

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Pursuant to the above Acts and Regulations the Minister, and the
Administrator appointed by the Minister, has the discretion to
issue permits or licences required under the Acts to a person,
subject to such terms and conditions as the Minister or
Administrator considers advisable, and to make regulations
ancillary to the foregoing. The Regulations may prescribe
preferential access to permits and licences, and preferential
conditions on such permits and licences, for residents of
Manitoba or Canada.

821

Reservation I-PT-52
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Services incidental to agriculture

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 8811(other than rental of agricultural equipment with
operator)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Wild Rice Act, C.C.S.M. c. W-140

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only persons who have been resident in Manitoba for at least
one year are entitled to apply for a licence, permit, load slip or
export certificate under this Act.

822

Reservation I-PT-53
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Services incidental to manufacturing

Industry Classification:

CPC 0311, 0312, 8843

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Forest Act, C.C.S.M. c. F-150
Forest Use and Management Regulation, Man. Reg. 227/88R

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Pursuant to the above Act and Regulation, the Minister is
responsible for regulating all forestry matters in accordance with
the Act and Regulation, and has the discretion to make grants or
issue permits or licences required under the Act to a person,
subject to such terms and conditions as the Minister considers
advisable. Timber cutting rights must be granted in a way that
the Minister believes secures the maximum benefit for
Manitoba’s forestry industry. Manitoba residents or Canadian
citizens may be given preference if such grants are made or
permits or licences are issued.

823

Reservation I-PT-54
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Passenger road transport (taxicabs)

Industry Classification:

CPC 71221

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Taxicab Act, C.C.S.M. c. T-10
The Highway Traffic Act, C.C.S.M. c. H-60

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Taxicab Act requires all persons seeking to operate a
taxi or carry on a taxi business to apply for and obtain a
taxicab business licence from the Taxicab Board. The
Board has the power to impose terms and conditions on a
taxicab business licence it issues. In deciding whether or
not to grant a licence, the Board must apply tests of
“public convenience” and “necessity in respect of the
number of taxicabs required in The City of Winnipeg”.

2.

The Highway Traffic Act requires all persons seeking to
operate a taxi across municipal boundaries to apply for
and obtain a certificate from the Motor Transport
Board. The Board has the power to impose terms and
conditions on a certificate it issues. In deciding whether or
not to grant a certificate, the Board must consider if the
existing facilities for transportation are insufficient or that
the public convenience will be promoted by the
establishment or continuance from year to year of the
proposed transportation service.

824

Reservation I-PT-55
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Live animals and animal products
Meats and dairy products
Other food products n.e.c.
Services incidental to agriculture

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 02, 21, 22, 239, 8811 (other than rental of agricultural
equipment with operator)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Farm Products Marketing Act, C.C.S.M. c. F-47
Dairy Farmers of Manitoba Marketing Plan Regulation, Man.
Reg. 89/2004
Manitoba Egg and Pullet Producers Marketing Plan Regulation,
Man. Reg. 70/2005
Manitoba Chicken Broiler Producers Marketing Plan
Regulation, Man. Reg. 246/2004
Manitoba Turkey Producers Marketing Plan Regulation, Man.
Reg. 38/2004
Manitoba Vegetable Producers Marketing Plan Regulation,
Man. Reg. 117/2009
The Milk Prices Review Act, C.C.S.M. c. M-130

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The boards and commissions under the above measures may
afford preferences to permanent residents of Manitoba or
Canadian citizens.

825

Reservation I-PT-56
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical power

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Manitoba Hydro Act, C.C.S.M. c. H-190
The Public Utilities Board Act, C.C.S.M. c. P-280
The Water Power Act, C.C.S.M. c. W-60
The Environment Act, C.C.S.M. c. E-125
The Crown Corporations Public Review and Accountability Act,
C.C.S.M. c. C336

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

2.

The above measures, among other things, permit the
Government of Manitoba or Manitoba Hydro to:
(a)

regulate, and issue various licences, authorisations or
approvals relating to the generation, transmission,
distribution, importation, exportation and supply and
sale of electricity, if generated from renewable
energy sources or from other goods, forces or sources
from which it is possible to generate electricity;

(b)

regulate the development, construction or
maintenance of power plants, generating stations,
substations, transmission lines, transmission towers
and other facilities or structures or equipment
required in connection with any of the activities set
out in paragraph (a); and

(c)

transfer or grant real property or interests in real
property in Manitoba, or transfer personal property or
interests in personal property, in connection with any
of the activities set out in paragraphs (a) or (b).

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discrimination in favour of
Manitoba residents or entities formed in accordance with
the laws of Canada (and having a place of business in
Manitoba).

826

Reservation I-PT-57
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Liquor and Gaming Control Act, C.C.S.M. c. L-160
The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C-225

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Liquor and Gaming Control Authority of Manitoba has the
discretion to grant licences to sell alcoholic beverages. If the
applicant is an individual, the licence may only be issued to an
adult natural person who is a Canadian citizen or has permanent
residence status and resides in Canada. If the applicant is a
partnership, all of its members must meet this requirement. If the
applicant is a corporation, it must be incorporated or authorised
to carry on its business in Manitoba under Manitoba law. If the
applicant is incorporated under Manitoba law, 25 per cent of the
corporation’s directors must be residents of Canada (or at least
one, if there are three or fewer directors).

827

Reservation I-PT-58
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Liquor and Gaming Control Act, C.C.S.M. c.G-5
The Manitoba Liquor and Lotteries Corporation Act, C.C.S.M.
c. L-210
The Manitoba Horse Racing Commission Act, C.C.S.M. c. H-90
Rules of Thoroughbred Racing and Commission Directives, 2011
Rules of Standardbred Racing and Commission Directives, 2010
Commission Quarterhorse Directives, 2011
Pari-Mutuel Betting Supervision Regulations, SOR 91-365

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Gaming Activities by Charitable and Religious Organisations,
Fairs and Exhibitions and Concession and Amusement Operators
1.

Charitable and religious organisations, fairs and exhibitions
and concession and amusement operators may not carry on
gaming activities in Manitoba unless they are licenced to
do so by the Liquor and Gaming Control Authority of
Manitoba or by another body authorised by Manitoba. The
Liquor and Gaming Control Authority has discretion to
issue these licences subject to such terms and conditions as
it considers advisable, and may afford preferential
treatment to applicants with a presence in Manitoba.

2.

No one may become an employee of The Manitoba Liquor
and Lotteries Corporation or of a Manitoba gaming
operator, or regularly be in a premises in Manitoba if the
gaming activity is taking place for the purpose of providing
a gaming service, unless they have been registered for this
purpose by the Liquor and Gaming Control Authority. The
Liquor and Gaming Control Authority has discretion to
register a person, subject to such terms and conditions as it
considers advisable, and may afford preferential treatment
to Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Manitoba.

3.

No proprietor, business entity or association may become a

828

Manitoba gaming operator, a Manitoba video lottery
terminal siteholder, a Manitoba lottery ticket retailer or a
supplier of gaming supplies or gaming services in
Manitoba unless they have been registered for this purpose
by the Liquor and Gaming Control Authority. The Liquor
and Gaming Control Authority has discretion to register a
proprietor, business entity or association, subject to such
terms and conditions as it considers advisable, and may
afford preferential treatment to Canadian citizens or
permanent residents of Manitoba or to business entities or
associations with a presence in Manitoba.
Gaming Activities – Lottery Schemes
4.

Only the Government of Manitoba is authorised to conduct
and manage lottery schemes in Manitoba that fall outside
the authority of the Liquor and Gaming Control Authority
or other bodies authorised to issue licences to conduct and
manage lottery schemes in Manitoba. Manitoba conducts
and manages lottery schemes within Manitoba through The
Manitoba Liquor and Lotteries Corporation, as agent for
Manitoba. Manitoba also conducts and manages lottery
schemes in Manitoba and one or more other Canadian
jurisdictions in co-operation with the governments of those
other jurisdictions through Western Canada Lottery
Corporation and Interprovincial Lottery Corporation. The
Manitoba Liquor and Lotteries Corporation, Western
Canada Lottery Corporation and Interprovincial Lottery
Corporation are collectively referred to as the
“Corporations”.

5.

Manitoba
treatment
Manitoba
Manitoba
activities.

and the Corporations may afford preferential
to Canadian citizens or permanent residents of
or to business entities with a presence in
in connection with any of the foregoing

Horse Racing and Betting
6.

No one may operate a race track or a pari-mutuel betting
theatre or act as a concessionaire on a race track or in a
betting theatre in Manitoba unless they are licenced to do
so by the Horse Racing Commission. The Commission has
discretion to issue licences to any person or business entity,
subject to such terms and conditions as it considers
advisable, and may afford preferential treatment to
Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Manitoba or
business entities with an office in Manitoba.
829

Reservations applicable in New Brunswick
Reservation I-PT-59
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural, forest and other wooded land
Forestry and logging products

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 531

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Crown Lands and Forest Act, S.N.B. 1980, c. C-38.1

Description:

Investment
Subject to certain exceptions every licence or permit authorising
the cutting of Crown timber shall be granted on condition that all
timber cut thereunder must be processed in New Brunswick into
lumber, pulp or other wood products.

830

Reservation I-PT-60
Sector:

Mining

Sub-Sector:

Mining
Quarrying and oil well industries

Industry Classification:

CPC 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Mining Act, S.N.B. 1985, c. M-14.1

Description:

Investment
If required to do so by the Minister at the time a mining lease is
granted or at any time thereafter, a lessee shall process or further
process in the Province any minerals mined in the Province
under the mining lease.

831

Reservation I-PT-61
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Liquor Control Act, R.S.N.B. 1973, c. L-10

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The New Brunswick Liquor Commission (“ANBL”) is a
Government of New Brunswick Crown agency that is the
sole importer and wholesaler, retailer, and distributor of
alcoholic beverages in New Brunswick. The above
measures permit New Brunswick to regulate and authorise
the importation, purchase, production, distribution, supply,
marketing and sale of alcoholic beverages in New
Brunswick. The ANBL sets, at its discretion, performance
requirements that must be met or exceeded in order for the
importation, distribution and retail relationship to continue
with any given supplier be they domestic or international.

2.

The ANBL reserves the right to preferentially promote and
market locally produced alcoholic beverage products.

832

Reservations applicable in Newfoundland and Labrador
Reservation I-PT-62
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 7112, 71232, 7131, 7422, 8675, 883, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access (CPC 71232 and 7422 only)
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Atlantic Accord
Implementation Newfoundland and Labrador Act, R.S.N.L. 1990,
c. C-2
Canada-Newfoundland Atlantic Accord – February 11, 1985
Energy Corporation Act, S.N.L. 2007, c. E-11.01
Petroleum and Natural Gas Act, RSNL 1990, c. P-10

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Newfoundland
and Labrador to regulate and issue various authorisations
relating to the exploration, production, extraction, development
and transportation of hydrocarbons, and the granting of
exclusive rights to operate hydrocarbon distribution systems
and storage facilities, including, related hydrocarbon pipelines,
marine distribution, transshipment facilities and transport
services. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on various
factors, limitations on market access, imposition of
performance requirements or discrimination in favour of
residents of Newfoundland and Labrador or entities established
in accordance with the laws of Canada or a province or territory
thereof and having a place of business and substantive
operations within Newfoundland and Labrador.

833

Reservation I-PT-63
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Electric Power Control Act, 1994, S.N.L. 1994, c. E-5.1
Energy Corporation Act, S.N.L. 2007, c. E-11.01
Energy Corporation of Newfoundland and Labrador Water
Rights Act, S.N.L. 2008, c. E-11.02
Hydro Corporation Act, 2007, SNL 2007, c. H-17
Lower Churchill Development Act, RSNL 1990, c. L-27
Lands Act, SNL 1991, c. 36
Water Resources Act SNL 2002, c. W-401

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures, among other things, permit the
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador to:
(a) regulate and issue various authorisations relating to the
production, generation, development, transmission
(including system control), distribution, delivery,
supply and exportation of electricity, and provide for
the construction and maintenance of related facilities;
(b) provide for the granting of the lands or waters within
the domain of the Province for a good, source or force
of energy from which it is possible to produce
electricity, including the installation of wind turbines
and hydroelectric developments; and
(c) set and modify rates for electricity.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements or
discrimination in favour of residents of Newfoundland and
Labrador or entities established in accordance with the
834

laws of Canada or a province or territory thereof and
having a place of business and substantive operations
within Newfoundland and Labrador.

835

Reservation I-PT-64
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Wood in the rough
Products of wood, cork, straw and plaiting materials
Forestry and logging products
Pulp, paper and paper products
Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and
cork, except furniture and manufacture of articles of
straw
Plaiting materials on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 31, 321, 88430

Type of Reservation:

Market access (CPC 31 only)
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Forestry Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. F-23
Forest Protection Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. F-22
Plant Protection Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. P-16

Description:

Investment
The above measures allow the Government of Newfoundland
and Labrador to regulate and issue various authorisations
relating to the production, extraction and development of
forestry resources and related products within the Province.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these measures
may involve discretionary decisions based on various factors,
limitations on market access, imposition of performance
requirements or discrimination in favour of residents of
Newfoundland and Labrador or entities established in
accordance with the laws of Canada or a province or territory
thereof and having a place of business and substantive
operations within Newfoundland and Labrador.

836

Reservation I-PT-65
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Forestry and fishing
Wholesale trade services of agriculture raw materials and live
animals
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 021, 029, 04, 21, 22, 6221, 62224, 881 (other than
rental of agricultural equipment with operator and 8814), 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Farm Products Corporation Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. F-5
Natural Products Marketing Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. N-2
Poultry and Poultry Products Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. P-18

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures allow the Government of Newfoundland
and Labrador to regulate and issue various authorisations
relating to the production and marketing of agricultural and food
products and the marketing of fish products and wild fur within
the Province, including measures related to the supply
management of dairy, eggs and poultry products. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, these measures may
involve discretionary decisions based on various factors, the
imposition of performance requirements or discrimination in
favour of residents of Newfoundland and Labrador or entities
established in accordance with the laws of Canada or a province
or territory thereof and having a place of business and
substantive operations within Newfoundland and Labrador.

837

Reservation I-PT-66
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Prepared and preserved fish
Wholesale trade services of fisheries products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 212, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Fisheries Act, S.N.L. 1995, c. F-12.1
Aquaculture Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. A-13
Fish Inspection Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. F-12
Fishing Industry Collective Bargaining Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. F18
Fish Processing Licensing Board Act, S.N.L. 2004, c. F-12.01
Professional Fish Harvesters Act, S.N.L. 1996, c. P-26.1
Lands Act, S.N.L. 1991, c. 36
Water Resources Act, S.N.L. 2002 c. W-4.01

Description:

Investment
The above measures allow the Government of Newfoundland
and Labrador to regulate and issue various authorisations
relating to the production, processing or marketing of fish and
aquaculture fish products, including the transfer, delivery or
transmission of marine products by fish harvesters,
aquaculturalists and subsequent purchasers. These measures
provide for the imposition of performance requirements in
certain circumstances.

838

Reservation I-PT-67
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Corporations Act, R.S.N.L 1990 c. C-36

Description:

Investment
1.

2.

At least 25 per cent of the directors of all corporations
incorporated under the Corporations Act must be resident
Canadians, except:
(a)

a corporate body that was incorporated under The
Companies Act and was continued under the
Corporation Act, and maintains the same proportion
of non-resident directors after January 1, 1987 that it
had before January 1, 1987; or

(b)

a corporation that earns no income in Canada.

Directors of a corporation incorporated under the
Corporations Act must not transact a business at a meeting
of directors unless at least 25 per cent of directors present
are resident Canadians, except if a resident Canadian
director who is unable to be present approves, in writing or
by telephone or other communications facilities, of the
business transacted, and at least 25 per cent of the directors
at the meeting would have been resident Canadian had that
director been present.

839

Reservation I-PT-68
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Surface surveying services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86753

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Land Surveyors Act, 1991, S.N.L. 1991, c. C-37

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canadian permanent residency is required for the
issuance of a certificate of authorisation to a firm, a
partnership or corporate body to practice surveying
within the Province.

840

Reservation I-PT-69
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Private investigation and security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 873

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Private Investigation and Security Services Act, R.S.N.L. 1990,
c.P-24

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. The holder of a licence to carry on the business of
private investigation or security services agency
must be a citizen or permanent resident of
Canada, and the manager of such business must
ordinarily reside in Canada.
2.

A majority of the board of directors must be permanent
residents of Canada.

841

Reservation I-PT-70
Sector:

Tourism

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting, tourist guide agencies
Own-account hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472, 8813, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Wild Life Act, R.S.N.L. 1990 c.W-8

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Non-residents of the Province must employ licenced guides
while undertaking certain licenced hunting activities within
the Province.

2.

Non-residents of the Province are not permitted to obtain
certain types of licences, and are required to obtain nonresident licences to undertake certain fishing activities
within the Province.

3.

Canadian residency is required in order to obtain registration
as a guide.

842

Reservation I-PT-71
Sector:

Land

Sub-Sector:

Recreational and other open land

Industry Classification:

CPC 5330

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Lands Act, S.N.L. 1991, c. 36
Policy Directive FT. 004 (Amendment 1), 2001

Description:

Investment
Only permanent residents of the Province are eligible to receive
residential cottage licences for Crown land.

843

Reservation I-PT-72
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Railroad transportation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 711

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Rail Service Act, 2009, S.N.L. 2009, c. R-1.2

Description:

Investment
A person seeking to purchase, operate or construct a rail service
within the Province must first obtain Provincial approval. This
approval may be granted on terms and conditions the Province
considers appropriate. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, this approval may involve discretionary decisions
based on various factors, including the imposition of
performance requirements.

844

Reservation I-PT-73
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Other land transportation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Aquaculture Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. A-13
Fisheries Act, S.N.L. 1995, c. F-12.1
Fish Inspection Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. F-12
Liquor Corporation Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L-19
Liquor Control Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L-18
Motor Carrier Act, R.S.N. 1990, c. M-19
Professional Fish Harvesters Act, S.N.L. 1996, c. P-26.1

Description:

Investment
Public convenience and needs tests are applied to passenger
transportation and to some subsectors of freight transportation
within the Province. The criteria relating to approval include: the
adequacy of current levels of service, market conditions
establishing the requirement for the expanded service, the effect
of new entrants on public convenience, and the fitness,
willingness and ability of the applicant to provide proper service.
Performance requirements may be imposed.

845

Reservation I-PT-74
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Labour Relations Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L-1

Description:

Investment
The above measure allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council of
Newfoundland and Labrador to issue Special Project Orders.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these Orders
may involve discretionary decisions based on various factors and
limitations on or linkages to investment or market access,
imposition of performance requirements or discrimination in
favour of residents of Newfoundland and Labrador or entities
established in accordance with the laws of Canada or a province
or territory thereof and having a place of business and
substantive operations within Newfoundland and Labrador.

846

Reservation I-PT-75
Sector:

Recreational, cultural, sporting and associated services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting
Services incidental to manufacturing of metal products,
machinery and equipment

Industry Classification:

CPC 8844, 885, 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access (CPC 8844 and 885 only)
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Lotteries Act, S.N.L. 1991, c. 53

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measure permits the Government of
Newfoundland and Labrador to regulate and issue various
authorisations relating to services, suppliers of services,
manufacturing, suppliers of materials, operations and
repairs relating to lotteries, lottery schemes, amusement
machines, video lottery machines, games of chance, races,
betting theatres, bingo casinos and promotional contests.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, limitations on market access, imposition
of performance requirements or discrimination in favour
of residents of Newfoundland and Labrador or entities
established in accordance with the laws of Canada or a
province or territory thereof and having a place of
business
and
substantive
operations
within
Newfoundland and Labrador.

847

Reservation I-PT-76
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 643 and 88411

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Liquor Corporation Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L-19
Liquor Control Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. L-18

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures permit the Government of
Newfoundland and Labrador to regulate and issue various
authorisations relating to the production, distribution,
supply, sale, and marketing of alcoholic beverages.

2.

The Newfoundland Liquor Corporation operates as a
monopoly responsible for the distribution, supply,
transport, sale and marketing of alcoholic beverages.

3.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, limitations on market access, imposition
of performance requirements or discrimination in favour
of residents of Newfoundland and Labrador or entities
established in accordance with the laws of Canada or a
province or territory thereof and having a place of
business
and
substantive
operations
within
Newfoundland and Labrador.

848

Reservation I-PT-77
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services (notaries)

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Notaries Public Act, R.S.N.L. 1990 c. N-5

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a Canadian citizen that is resident in the Province is
eligible to become a notary public for the Province.

849

Reservations applicable in the Northwest Territories
Reservation I-PT-78
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services (notaries public)

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Evidence Act, R.S.N.W.T. 1988, c. E-8, s. 79

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A person who seeks appointment as a notary public must reside
in the Northwest Territories and be either a citizen of Canada or
a person who has the status of a permanent resident of Canada.

850

Reservation applicable in Nova Scotia
Reservation I-PT-79
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting services

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Certified General Accountants Act, S. N.S. 1998, c. 10
Certified Management and Accountants of Nova Scotia Act,
S.N.S. 2005, c. 35
Public Accountants Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 369
Chartered Accountants Act, S.N.S. 1994, c. 14

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only residents of Canada are eligible to be licenced to practice
as a public accountant in Nova Scotia and to use the designation
“Public Accountant”.

851

Reservation I-PT-80
Sector:

Tourism and recreational services

Sub-Sector:

Service incidental to hunting
Tour guide agencies
Own-account hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472, 8813, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Wildlife Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 504

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only Nova Scotia residents are eligible to receive a fur
harvesters’ or moose hunting licence. Non-residents may be
subject to supervision by a qualified guide while hunting or
fishing in designated rivers.

852

Reservation I-PT-81
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Highway freight transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

The Public Utilities Act, R.S., c. 380, s. 1

Description:

Investment
Public convenience and needs tests are applied to some subsectors of freight transportation within the Province. The criteria
relating to approval include the adequacy of current levels of
service, market conditions establishing the requirement for the
expanded service, the effect of new entrants on public
convenience, and the fitness, willingness and ability of the
applicant to provide proper service. Performance requirements
may be imposed.

853

Reservation I-PT-82
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Interurban motor bus transport and scheduled services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Public Utilities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 380

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Licencing of new entrants to this service is subject to public
convenience and needs tests which includes: the examination of
the adequacy of current levels of service; market conditions
establishing the requirement for expanded service; the effect of
new entrants on public convenience, including the continuity and
quality of service; and the fitness, willingness and ability of the
applicant to provide proper service. Performance requirements
may be imposed.

854

Reservation I-PT-83
Sector:

Land

Sub-Sector:

Other land

Industry Classification:

CPC 539

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Land Titles Clarification Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 250

Description:

Investment
An applicant who claims land in a land titles clarification area
based on historical adverse possession must be a resident of
Nova Scotia.

855

Reservation I-PT-84
Sector:

Credit and collection services

Sub-Sector:

Credit reporting and collection agency services
Consumer reporting agencies

Industry Classification:

CPC 87901, 87902, 87909

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Consumer Creditors’ Conduct Act, R.S.N.S., c. 91
Consumer Protection Act, R.S.N.S., c. 92
Consumer Reporting Act, R.S.N.S., c. 93
Consumer Services Act, R.S.N.S., c. 94
Direct Sellers Licensing and Regulation Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c.
129

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Whether as an individual or partnership, an applicant for
registration as a consumer reporting agency must be a
Canadian citizen or lawfully admitted to Canada and
ordinarily resident. A corporate applicant must be
incorporated in Canada and registered to do business in
Nova Scotia. A consumer reporting agency, whether an
individual, partnership, or corporation, shall operate from the
fixed place of business in Nova Scotia, that shall be open to
the public during normal business hours.

2.

Credit Reporting and Collection Agency Services must be
supplied through a commercial presence.

3.

Permanent residency is required to provide Consumer
Agents Services

4.

A licence application requires an address for service in Nova
Scotia with direct sellers maintaining a permanent place of
business in Nova Scotia.

856

Reservation I-PT-85
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 643, 88411

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Liquor Control Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 260

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. The above measure allows the Province, through the
monopoly of the Nova Scotia Liquor License Corporation,
to regulate and issue various authorisations relating to the
purchase, importation, possession, delivery and sale of
liquor and merchandise.
2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this
measure may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, limitations on market access, imposition of
performance requirements or discrimination in favour of
residents of Nova Scotia or entities established in
accordance with the laws of Canada or a province or
territory thereof and having a place of business and
substantive business activities with Nova Scotia.

857

Reservation I-PT-86
Sector:

Community and personal services

Sub-Sector:

Religious organizations

Industry Classification:

CPC 95910

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Solemnization of Marriage Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 436

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only Nova Scotia residents may be registered as a person
authorised to perform marriages.

858

Reservation I-PT-87
Sector:

Mining

Sub-Sector:

Mining, quarrying, and oil well industries

Industry Classification:

CPC 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 883

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Mineral Resources Act, S.N.S. 1990, c. 18

Description:

Investment
1.

Except for testing, no person shall remove from the
Province to a place outside of Canada for processing an
output from a mine in the Province without first obtaining
the consent of the Minister.

2.

A penalty equal to three times the royalty an operator
would otherwise be required to pay may be ordered for
failure to obtain consent.

3.

Differential royalties also apply for mine output processed
outside Nova Scotia.

859

Reservation I-PT-88
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting
Services incidental to manufacturing

Industry Classification:

CPC 8844, 885, 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access (only to CPC 8844 and 885)
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Gaming Control Act, S.N.S. 1994-95, c .4

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. The above measure allows the Province to regulate
and issue various authorisations relating to
services, suppliers of services, manufacturing,
suppliers of materials, operations and repairs
relating to lotteries, lottery schemes, amusement
machines, video lottery machines, games of
chance, races, betting theatres, bingo casinos and
promotional contest.
2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
these measures may involve discretionary decision
based on various factors, limitations on market
access, imposition of performance requirements or
discrimination in favour of residents of Nova
Scotia or entities established in accordance with the
laws of Canada or a province or territory thereof
and having a place of business and substantive
business activities with Nova Scotia.

860

Reservation I-PT-89
Sector:

Community and personal services

Sub-Sector:

Funeral, cremation and undertaking services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9703

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Embalmers and Funeral Directors Act, R.S.N.S., c. 144

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. The Minister has power to refuse to issue or re-issue a
licence in respect of a funeral home for any reasonable
cause.
2. The regulation provides that a person applying for an
apprentice embalmer’s licence must have completed one of
two courses of study in Nova Scotia. If a person has
completed a course of study in a jurisdiction other than
Nova Scotia, the Board has the discretion not to approve or
accept the course of study.

861

Reservation I-PT-90
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude oil and natural gas

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 7112, 71232, 7131, 7422, 8675, 883, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access (CPC 71232 and 7422 only)
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Canada-Nova Scotia Offshore Petroleum Resources Accord
Implementation (Nova Scotia) Act, S.N.S. 1987, c. 3
Crown Lands Act, R.S.N.S.1989, c. 114
Gas Distribution Act, S.N.S. 1997, c. 4
Offshore Petroleum Royalty Act, S.N.S. 1987, c. 9
Petroleum Resources Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 342
Petroleum Resources Removal Permit Act, S.N.S. 1999, c. 7
Pipeline Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 345
Public Utilities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 380

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Government of Nova Scotia regulates and issues
various authorisations relating to the exploration,
production, extraction, processing, development and
transportation of hydrocarbons, and the granting of
exclusive rights to operate hydrocarbon distribution
systems and storage facilities, including related
hydrocarbon pipelines, marine distribution, transshipment
facilities and transport services.

2.

The granting of authorisations may involve discretionary
decisions based on various factors, limitations on market
access, imposition of performance requirements or
discrimination in favour of residents of Nova Scotia or
entities established in accordance with the laws of Canada
or a province or territory thereof and having a place of
business and substantive business activities with Nova
Scotia.

862

Reservation I-PT-91
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Prepared and preserved fish
Wholesale trade services of fisheries products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 212, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Fisheries and Coastal Resources Act, R.S.N.S. 1996, c. 25
Fisheries Organizations Support Act, S.N.S., 1995-96, c.6

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. The above measures allow the Province to regulate and issue
various authorisations relating to the production, processing
or marketing of fish and aquaculture fish products, including
the transfer, delivery or transmission of marine products by
fish harvesters, aquaculturalists and subsequent purchasers.
2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements or
discrimination in favour of residents of Nova Scotia or
entities established in accordance with the laws of Canada or
a province or territory thereof and having a place of business
and substantive business activities with Nova Scotia.

863

Reservation I-PT-92
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Products of wood, cork, straw and plaiting materials
Forestry and logging products
Pulp, paper and paper products
Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork, except
furniture and manufacture of articles of straw
Plaiting materials on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 31, 321, 88430

Type of Reservation:

Market access (CPC 31 only)
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Crown Lands Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 114
Forests Act, R.S.N.S, 1989, c. 179
Primary Forests Products Marketing Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 355

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow the Province to regulate and
issue various authorisations relating to the production,
extraction and development of forestry resources and
related products within the Province.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, limitations on market access imposition of
performance requirements or discrimination in favour of
residents of Nova Scotia or entities established in
accordance with the laws of Canada or a province or
territory thereof and having a place of business and
substantive business activities with Nova Scotia.

864

Reservation I-PT-93
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Forestry and fishing
Wholesale trade services of agriculture raw materials and live
animals
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 021, 029, 04, 21, 22, 6221, 881 (other than rental of
agricultural equipment with operator and 8814), 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Natural Products Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 308
Dairy Industry Act, S.N.S. 2000, c. 24
Agriculture and Rural Credit Act, R.S.N.S., 1989, c. 7
Agriculture and Marketing Act, R.S.N.S., c. 6

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow the Province to regulate and
issue various authorisations relating to the production and
marketing of agricultural and food products and fish
products within the Province, including measures related
to the supply management of dairy, eggs and poultry
products.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements
or discrimination in favor of residents of Nova Scotia or
entities established in accordance with the laws of Canada
or a province or territory thereof and having a place of
business and substantive business activities with Nova
Scotia.

865

Reservation I-PT-94
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Crown Lands Act, R.S.N.S., 1989, c. 114
Electricity Act, S.N.S. 2004, c. 25
Nova Scotia Power Privatization Act, S.N.S., 1992, c.8
Nova Scotia Power Reorganization (1998) Act, S.N.S. 1998, c.
19
Public Utilities Act, R.S.N.S., 1989, c. 380
Renewable Electricity Regulations, O.I.C. 2010-381 (October
12, 2010), N.S. Reg. 155/2010

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

2.

The above measures, among other things, permit the
Government of Nova Scotia to:
(a)

regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
the production, development, operation and
maintenance of generation, transmission (including
system control), distribution, delivery, importation,
exportation and supply of electricity, including
electricity generated by renewable energy sources;

(b)

provide for the granting of lands or waters within
the Province for any good, source or force of energy
from which it is possible to produce electricity,
including the installation of wind turbines and
hydroelectric developments; and

(c)

Set and modify electricity rates, including feed-in
tariffs.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements or
866

discrimination in favour of residents of Nova Scotia or
entities established in accordance with the laws of Canada
or a province or territory thereof and having a place of
business and substantive business activities with Nova
Scotia.

867

Reservations applicable in Nunavut
Reservation I-PT-95
Sector:

Tourism, agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Other – services incidental to hunting
Hunting, fishing and trapping industries
Tourist guide agencies (wilderness tourism)
Own-account hunting
Live animals
Hides, skins and furskins

Industry Classification:

CPC 021, 0297, 7472, 8813, 96419

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Territorial - Nunavut

Measures:

Wildlife Act, S. Nu. 2003, c. 26, s. 113

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In the allocation of a dealer’s licence, guiding licence, fur farm
licence, game farm licence, tanning licence or taxidermy licence,
preference shall be given to an applicant who had made his or
her principal residence in the Nunavut Settlement Area for at
least 18 continuous months prior to the submission of his or her
application. Preference will also be given to applications that
will likely provide direct benefits to the Nunavut economy, in
particular through employment of local human and economic
resources.

868

Reservation I-PT-96
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services (notaries public)

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial - Nunavut

Measures:

Evidence Act, R.S.N.W.T. 1988, c. E-8, s. 79

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Every person who seeks appointment as a notary public must
reside in Nunavut and be either a citizen of Canada or a person
who has the status of a permanent resident of Canada.

869

Reservations applicable in Ontario
Reservation I-PT-97
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.16, ss. 118(3),
126(2), and 45(1)(b)
Special Acts of the Legislature incorporating specific companies

Description:

Investment
1. At least 25 per cent of directors of corporations (other than
non-resident corporation) must be resident Canadians. If
fewer than four directors, at least one must be a resident
Canadian. Majority of directors’ meetings must be held in
Canada each year.
2. Constraints may be placed on the transfer and ownership of
shares in corporations. Corporations may sell shareholders’
shares without their consent and purchase shares to qualify
for certain benefits that are based on minimum Canadian
ownership requirements.

870

Reservation I-PT-98
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to manufacturing

Industry Classification:

CPC 884, 885

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Technical Standards and Safety Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 16
Upholstered and Stuffed Articles, O. Reg. 218/01 ss. 8, and 17

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Except for a second-hand article, no person shall sell or offer for
sale an upholstered or stuffed article that has not been
manufactured by a manufacturer licenced in Ontario or
manufactured in a designated jurisdiction.

871

Reservation I-PT-99
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Gaming Control Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 24
General O. Reg. 78/12
Order in Council 1413/08, ss. 3(b) and 16(i)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Ontario regulates gaming assistants and suppliers of services and
equipment relating to lottery schemes, including games of
chance, betting, bingos, casinos and promotional contests,
including through provincial monopolies. Proceeds must be used
to provide direct benefits to Ontario residents.

872

Reservation I-PT-100
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Collection agents

Industry Classification:

CPC 87902

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Collection and Debt Settlement Services Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C14
General, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 74, ss. 12(2)(a), and19.1

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only Canadian citizens, permanent residents or persons
ordinarily resident in Canada are eligible to be registered as
collection agents and to engage in collection agency
business in Ontario.

2.

A corporation must be incorporated under Canadian
legislation (federal or provincial) to carry on business of
collection agencies in Ontario. Exemptions under the Act
and regulation are provided for not-for-profit credit
counselling services.

873

Reservation I-PT-101
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services on a fee or contract basis
Real estate services involving own or leased property

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, 822

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Real Estate and Business Brokers Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 30,
Sched. C
General, O. Reg. 567/05 para.2 of ss. 4(1) and ss. 24(1)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Real estate services must be supplied through a commercial
presence in Ontario.

874

Reservation I-PT-102
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Wine products

Industry Classification:

CPC 242

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Wine Content and Labelling Act, S.O 2000, c. 26, Sched. P
Content of Wine, O. Reg. 659/00

Description:

Investment
A winery in Ontario may sell wine manufactured from a blend
of imported and domestic grape products with a minimum of 25
per cent Ontario grape content per bottle.

875

Reservation I-PT-103
Sector:

Tourism

Sub-Sector:

Travel agency, tour operator and tourist guide services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7471

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Travel Industry Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 30, Sched. D, s. 4(1)
General, O. Reg. 26/05, s. 5, and ss.10(1)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

An individual must be a Canadian resident to register as a
travel agent and travel wholesaler in Ontario.

2.

Registrants may carry on business only if their permanent
place of business is in Ontario.

876

Reservation I-PT-104
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Services incidental to agriculture

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 8811 (other than rental of agricultural equipment with
operator)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Wild Rice Harvesting Act, R.S.O., 1990, c. W. 7, ss.1 and 3(2)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A person seeking to harvest wild rice on Crown lands must
obtain a licence. Only those who have resided in Ontario for 12
consecutive months immediately preceding the application are
eligible for a licence.

877

Reservation I-PT-105
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Land surveying (cadastral surveying)

Industry Classification:

CPC 86753

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Surveyors Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.29, ss. 3(6), 5(1), 12(1), 14(2)
and (3)
General, O. Reg. 1026, s. 23

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only a resident of Canada may obtain a licence to conduct
cadastral surveying. Only Canadian citizens can serve as
councillors of the Association of Ontario Land Surveyors
(“AOLS”)

2.

A corporation must primarily offer professional survey
services and 50 per cent of the board of directors must be
members of the AOLS in order to obtain a Certificate of
Authorization to offer cadastral surveying services. If the
corporation offers cadastral surveying at least one director
or full time employee must be licenced by the AOLS.

878

Reservation I-PT-106
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 8813

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act, S.O. 1997, c. 41, s.1(1)
Hunting, O.Reg. 665/98, s. 37

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a resident may be issued a licence for taking of bullfrogs
for sale or barter. A resident is a permanent resident or has his or
her primary residence in Ontario and has resided in Ontario for
six months of the preceding 12 months.

879

Reservation I-PT-107
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 8813

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act, S.O. 1997, c. 41, s. 1(1)
Trapping, O. Reg. 667/98, s. 11(1)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a Canadian citizen or an Ontario resident may be issued a
licence to hunt or trap fur-bearing animals. An Ontario resident
is defined as a person having his or her primary residence in
Ontario and has resided in Ontario for six of the 12 months
preceding application for a licence.

880

Reservation I-PT-108
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Sporting services
Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 9641, 8813

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act, S.O. 1997, c. 41
Hunting, O. Reg. 665/98, s. 12
Ontario Hunter Education Program Standards, Wildlife Policy
Section, 2006

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only Ontario residents are eligible to be appointed to instruct
hunting education courses.

881

Reservation I-PT-109
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 8813

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act, S.O. 1997, c. 41, ss. 1(1),
and 32
Hunting, O. Reg. 665/98, ss. 94 and 95

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To be eligible for a licence to act as a guide for hunting in the
Territorial District of Rainy River and for migratory bird hunting
on Lake St. Clair, an applicant must be an Ontario or Canadian
resident. A resident is a person having resided in Ontario for six
consecutive months immediately preceding application for a
licence.

882

Reservation I-PT-110
Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Wholesale trade services of fisheries products

Industry Classification:

CPC 62224

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Freshwater Fish Marketing Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.33

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
No person is permitted to control the buying or selling of fish in
Ontario except as authorised in the relevant Act.

883

Reservation I-PT-111
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Logs of coniferous wood
Logs of non-coniferous wood
Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork, except
furniture
Manufacture of articles of straw
Plaiting materials, on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 0311, 0312, 8843

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Crown Forest Sustainability Act, S.O. 1994, c. 25, ss. 30 and 34
General, O. Reg. 167/95

Description:

Investment
1. Forest resource licences that authorise the harvesting of
Crown trees are subject to the condition that all trees
harvested shall be manufactured in Canada into lumber,
pulp, or other products.
2. Forest resource licences are issued in respect of specific
areas of land. As such there are limits to the number of
licences issued.
3. The Minister may amend a forest resource licence in
accordance with Regulation 167/95, which requires the
submission of a forest management plan relating to social
and economic objectives. The needs and benefits of the local
communities will be given priorities into the planning effort
and objective setting and achievement before broader nonlocal communities.

884

Reservation I-PT-112
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Veterinarians Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. V. 3
General, O. Reg. 1093/90

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, or another status
under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S.C. 2001, c.
27, consistent with the class of licence for which the application
is made, is eligible to be licenced to practice veterinary medicine
in Ontario.

885

Reservation I-PT-113
Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Livestock Medicines Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.-23
General, O. Reg. 730/90

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only persons with an established place of business in Ontario
are eligible to be licenced to sell livestock medicine in Ontario.
Licences may be issued to sellers who have established a
temporary place of business at events such as races and
agricultural fairs or shows.

886

Reservation I-PT-114
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services (legal documentation and certification services)

Industry Classification:

CPC 86130

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Notaries Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. N.6, s. 2(1)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canadian citizenship is required to be appointed a notary public
in Ontario for a person who is not a barrister or solicitor.

887

Reservation I-PT-115
Sector:

Ores and minerals, electricity, gas and water

Sub-Sector:

Natural gas
Electrical energy

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 17, 334, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Ontario Energy Board Act, S.O. 1998, c. 15, Sched. B
Electricity Act, S.O. 1998, c. 15, Sched. A
Green Energy Act, S.O. 2009, c. 12, Sched. A
Green Energy and Green Economy Act, 2009, S.O. 2009, c. 12
Municipal Franchises Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M-55

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. The Government of Ontario and its energy authorities,
entities, and agencies, including, Independent Electricity
System Operator, Ontario Power Generation Inc., Hydro
One Inc. and the Ontario Energy Board, and their successors
or assigns, may permit one or more persons or entities to
establish or expand pipelines and electricity and gas
infrastructure or to produce, transmit, distribute, conserve,
manage (demand and load), store, sell, retail or market
energy (including electricity, natural gas or renewable
energy) in any region in Ontario including on corridor lands.
Further, the Government of Ontario or one of its energy
authorities, the Ontario Energy Board, or its successors or
assigns, may regulate the rates, storage, standards or
services provided by energy producers, distributors,
transmitters, sellers, retailers, marketers and storage
companies in Ontario.
2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, measures
and actions taken by Ontario and energy authorities, entities,
and agencies mentioned above and their successors or
assigns, may involve discretionary decisions, based on
factors that may afford preferential treatment in favour of:
(a)

residents of Ontario; or
888

(b)

entities established in accordance with the laws of
Canada or a province or territory thereof and having
a place of business in Ontario.

3. For greater certainty, any enterprise formed in accordance
with the laws of Ontario and having a place of business in
Ontario, shall be treated in the same manner as an enterprise
that is a resident of Ontario.

889

Reservation I-PT-116
Sector:

Mining

Sub-Sector:

Metal ores, other minerals
Manufacture of basic metals on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 14, 16, 8851

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Mining Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.14, 1990, s. 91

Description:

Investment
All ores or minerals raised or removed from lands, claims or
mining rights in Ontario must be treated and refined in Canada
to yield refined metal or other product suitable for direct use in
the arts without further treatment, unless the Lieutenant
Governor in Council exempts any lands, claims or mining rights
from the operation of this requirement.

890

Reservation I-PT-117
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Interurban transportation

Industry Classification:

CPC 71213

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Public Vehicles Act, R.S.O 1990, c. P-54

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The issuance of operating licences for public vehicles is subject
to a necessity and convenience test administered by the Ontario
Transport Highway Board.

891

Reservation I-PT-118
Sector:

Educational services

Sub-Sector:

Driver certification services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9290

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Highway Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8, s. 32 (5) Issuance of
driver’s licence, endorsements
Drivers’ Licences, O. Reg. 340/94
Licences for Driving Instructors and Driving School, O. Reg.
473/07
Driver Certification Program Policy
Beginner Driver Education Program
School Bus Driver Improvement Course

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To be eligible for a licence to deliver driver education and
training programs in Ontario, including the Driver Certification
Program, the School Bus Driver Improvement Course, and the
Beginner Driver Education Program, an applicant must own or
lease premises in Ontario that serve as the driving school’s
office and classrooms.

892

Reservation I-PT-119
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Co-operative Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C. 35, ss. 14(1)
and 85 (3)

Description:

Investment
1.

A majority of directors of every co-operative shall be
resident Canadians.

2.

Co-operative corporations must have a head office in
Ontario

893

Reservation I-PT-120
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Liquor Control Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L. 18
General, O. Reg. 717/90
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation and Public Protection Act,
R.S.O. 1996, c. 26, Sched.
Assignment of Powers and Duties, O. Reg. 141/01
Registrar of the Alcohol and Gaming Commission of Ontario
policies and practices

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures permit Ontario to regulate and
authorise the importation, purchase, production,
distribution, supply, marketing and sale of alcoholic
beverages in Ontario and to conduct these activities,
including through provincial monopolies. Beer may only
be sold in authorised government stores.

2.

The Registrar of Alcohol and Gaming authorises Ontario
wine, spirits and beer manufacturers to operate stores for
the sale of their own wine, spirits and beer, respectively.
The Alcohol and Gaming Commission of Ontario also
authorises only The Beer Store for the sale of domestic and
import beer.

894

Reservation I-PT-121
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land, forest and other wooded land

Industry Classification:

CPC 5310

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Municipal Act, S.O 2001, c. 25, s. 308.1
Assessment Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. A.31, s. 7
General, O. Reg. 282/98

Description:

Investment
Farm land and managed forest land owned by a Canadian citizen
or a person lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent
residence, or by a corporation whose voting rights are more than
50 per cent controlled by Canadian citizens or persons lawfully
admitted to Canada for permanent residence, are subject to
reduced property taxes.

895

Reservation I-PT-122
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Credit Unions and Caisses Populaires Act, S.O 1994, c. 11,
s.160

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
An individual or firm of accountants is qualified to be an auditor
of a credit union if the individual is ordinarily resident in
Canada.

896

Reservation I-PT-123
Sector:

Service of membership organizations

Sub-Sector:

Legal documentation and certification

Industry Classification:

CPC 8613, 95910

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

The Marriage Act, R.S.O 1990, c. M.3, ss.11 and 20

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Ontario reserves the right to restrict the category of persons
eligible to issue marriage licences, including on the basis of
residence, and to require that a person registered under the Act
to solemnise marriage must be an Ontario resident or have a
parish or pastoral charge in whole or in part in Ontario.

897

Reservation I-PT-124
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Forestry and fishing
Wholesale trade services of agriculture raw materials and live
animals
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 021, 029, 04, 21, 22, 881 (other than rental of
agricultural equipment with operator and 8814), 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Farm Products Marketing Act, R.S.O., c. F-9
Milk Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M. 12

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow the Province to regulate and
issue various authorisations relating to the production and
marketing of agricultural and food products within the
Province, including measures related to the supply
management of dairy, eggs and poultry products.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, measures
and actions taken by Ontario and entities, and agencies
mentioned above, may involve discretionary decisions,
based on factors that may afford preferential treatment in
favour of:
(a) residents of Ontario; or
(b) entities established in accordance with the laws of
Canada or a province or territory thereof and having
a place of business in Ontario.

898

Reservation I-PT-125
Sector:

Trade services

Sub-Sector:

Sale, maintenance and repair services of motor vehicles

Industry Classification:

CPC 611, 612

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Ontario

Measures:

Motor Vehicle Dealers Act, S.O. 2002, c. 30, Sched. B

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A motor vehicle dealer must be registered and operate only from
a place authorised in the dealer’s registration. The authorised
place must be in Ontario.

899

Reservations applicable in Prince Edward Island
Reservation I-PT-126
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Architects Acts, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. A-18.1
Architects Association of Prince Edward Island By-laws

Description:

Investment
A non-resident proprietorship, partnership or corporation
applying for a certificate of practice to practice architecture in
Prince Edward Island shall have at least two-thirds of the
partners, principals or directors of the partnership or corporation
be architects; and not less than the majority of issued shares of
each class of voting shares of the corporation are beneficially
owned by and registered in the name of architects.

900

Reservation I-PT-127
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and real estate agent industries

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, 822

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Real Estate Trading Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, R -2

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To sell real estate, a natural person must hold a Prince Edward
Island real estate licence. The Registrar shall not issue a licence
to an individual unless the individual is a citizen of Canada or
has the status of permanent resident of Canada.

901

Reservation I-PT-128
Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of motor fuel

Industry Classification:

CPC 613

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Petroleum Products Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, P-5.1

Description:

Investment
When issuing a licence with respect to the operation of an outlet
operated by a retailer, the Commission shall consider the public
interest, convenience and necessity by applying such criteria as
the Commission may from time to time consider advisable.

902

Reservation I-PT-129
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, L5
Fees Regulations and Lands Identification Regulations

Description:

Investment
1.

Non-resident persons must make application to acquire
more than five acres of land or land having a shore
frontage of more than 165 feet and receive permission
from the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Shore frontage
includes, but is not restricted to, land adjacent to oceans,
rivers, lakes, ponds, and swamps.

2.

The Government of Prince Edward Island issues permits to
non-resident persons under the Act and may impose more
onerous conditions including, that the land be identified
under the land identification program for agricultural use
or non-development use.

3.

Only residents of Prince Edward Island are eligible for a
property tax rebate on non-commercial real property.

903

Reservation I-PT-130
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Consumer credit reporting

Industry Classification:

CPC 87901

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Consumer Reporting Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, C-20

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Every consumer reporting agency registered under the Act shall
operate from a fixed place of business in Prince Edward Island.

904

Reservation I-PT-131
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Legal Profession Act, 1992 c. 39, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, L-6.1

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
To be eligible for admission to the Law Society of Prince
Edward Island and practice law, an individual must be a
Canadian citizen or a permanent resident of Canada.

905

Reservation I-PT-132
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Live animals and animal products
Meats
Dairy products
Food products n.e.c.

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 02, 21, 22, 239, 6221, 62112

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Natural Products Marketing Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1988, N-3
Dairy Industry Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1988, D-1
Agricultural Products Standards Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1988, A-9
Dairy Producers Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1988, D-2
Agricultural Insurance Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1988, A-8.2
Animal Health and Protection Act, R.S.P.E.I., A-11.1
Grain Elevators Corporation Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1993, c.8
Plant Health Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1990, c.45

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow Prince Edward Island to
regulate and issue authorisations on a matter relating to
marketing, including the buying, selling, packing grading,
storing, processing, shipping for sale or storage,
promoting, researching and offering for sale, in respect of,
but not limited to: poultry, eggs, dairy, hogs, cattle,
potatoes and turkeys, and including the production and
transport to carry out the objects of these Acts.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements
or discrimination in favour of residents of Prince Edward
Island or entities established in accordance with the laws
of Canada or a province or territory thereof and having a
place of business and substantive business operations
within Prince Edward Island.

906

Reservation I-PT-133
Sector:

Fisheries and aquaculture

Sub-Sector:

Wholesale trade of fishery products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Fisheries Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988 F-13.01
Fish Inspection Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988 F-13
Certified Fisheries Organizations Support Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988
C-2.1
Natural Products Marketing Act, R.S.P.E.I., 1988, N-3

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow Prince Edward Island to
regulate and issue authorisations on a matter relating to
resources and products of the fishery, including:
maintenance and development of the resources of the
fishery; fish buying and processing; and any other matter
or thing in order to give full effect to the objects of these
Acts.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements
or discrimination in favour of residents of Prince Edward
Island or entities established in accordance with the laws
of Canada or a province or territory thereof and having a
place of business and substantive business operations
within Prince Edward Island.

907

Reservation I-PT-134
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity, oil and natural gas
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 120, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Energy Corporation Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, E-7
Renewable Energy Act, R.S.P.E.I. 2004, C-16
Oil and Natural Gas Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, O-5
Electric Power Act, R.S.PE.I. 1988, E-4

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow Prince Edward Island to
regulate and issue authorisations on a matter relating to
energy and energy systems, oil and natural gas, and
renewable energy sources including: the generation,
accumulation, transmission, distribution, supply, purchase,
utilisation and disposal of energy; the drilling of wells and
the production and conservation of oil and natural gas; and
generally for carrying out any of the purposes or
provisions of these Acts.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements
or discrimination in favour of residents of Prince Edward
Island or entities established in accordance with the laws
of Canada or a province or territory thereof and having a
place of business and substantive business operations
within Prince Edward Island.

908

Reservation I-PT-135
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries products

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Services incidental to forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 8814

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Forest Management Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, F-14
Public Forest Council Act, R.S.P.E.I. 2001, C-48

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The above measures allow Prince Edward Island to regulate
and issue authorisations on a matter relating to forest
products, including: the conservation, protection, harvesting,
extraction and sale of forest products; issuing of licences,
certification of forest producers; importation of plants or
plant materials; fees and other charges; and generally for
carrying out the provisions of the Acts.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements or
discrimination in favour of residents of Prince Edward
Island or entities established in accordance with the laws of
Canada or a province or territory thereof and having a
place of business and substantive business operations
within Prince Edward Island.

909

Reservation I-PT-136
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages.

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Liquor Control Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988 L-14

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Prince Edward Island Liquor Control Commission
(“PEILCC”) is a Government of Prince Edward Island
Crown agency that is the sole importer and controls the
purchase, distribution and sale of alcoholic beverages in
Prince Edward Island. The PEILCC operates warehouse,
office facilities, and Licensee Distribution Centre. The
commission supplies and administers the operations of
retail liquor stores and Licensee Distribution Centre.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements
or discrimination in favour of residents of Prince
Edward Island or entities established in accordance with
the laws of Canada or a province or territory thereof and
having a place of business and substantive business
operations within Prince Edward Island.

910

Reservation I-PT-137
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Lotteries Commission Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, L-17

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Prince Edward Island Lotteries Commission is
authorised under the Act to develop, organise, undertake,
conduct and manage lottery schemes, pari-mutuel betting
systems, and internet based gaming on behalf of the
government of the Province or the governments of other
provinces that have any agreement with this Province
respecting any such lottery schemes or pari-mutuel betting
systems.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, imposition of performance requirements
or discrimination in favour of residents of Prince Edward
Island or entities established in accordance with the laws
of Canada or a province or territory thereof and having a
place of business and substantive business operations
within Prince Edward Island.

911

Reservations applicable in Québec
Reservation I-PT-138
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the acquisition of farm land by non-residents,
C.Q.L.R., c. A-4.1
Regulation respecting the declaration of non-resident status in
the application for registration of the acquisition of farm land;
C.Q.L.R., c. A-4.1, r. 1
Regulation respecting an application for authorization and the
information and documents required for the application,
C.Q.L.R., chapter A-4.1, r. 2
Regulation respecting the tariff of duties, fees, costs made under
the Act respecting the acquisition of farm land by non-residents,
C.Q.L.R., c. A-4.1, r. 3
An Act respecting the preservation of agricultural land and
agricultural activities, C.Q.L.R., c. P-41.1, and regulations
An Act respecting the lands in the domain of the State, C.Q.L.R.,
c. T-8.1
Regulation respecting the sale, lease and granting of immovable
rights on lands in the domain of the State, C.Q.L.R., c. T-8.1, r.
7

Description:

Investment
1.

Direct or indirect acquisition of farm land by non-residents
of Québec must be authorised by the Commission de
protection du territoire agricole du Québec. When it
receives an application for authorisation by non-residents
of Québec, the Commission takes into consideration the
possible uses of the land for agricultural purposes and the
economic consequences thereof.

2.

No person may, in a designated agricultural region, use a
lot for any purpose other than agriculture without the
authorisation of the Commission, which takes into
912

consideration specific socio-economics factors when
rendering a decision.
3.

Québec residents are given priority in the purchase or lease
of land in the domain of the State.

913

Reservation I-PT-139
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture
Horticulture and market gardening
Live animals and animal products
Wood in the rough
Fish and other fishing products
Meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, oils and fats
Dairy products
Grain mill products
Starches and starch products
Other food products
Services incidental to agriculture
Services incidental to animal husbandry
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 02, 031, 04, 21, 22, 23, 8811 (other than rental of
agricultural equipment with operator), 8812, 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Professional Syndicates Act, C.Q.L.R., c. S-40
An Act respecting the marketing of agricultural, food and fish
products, C.Q.L.R., c. M-35.1
Règlement des producteurs d’œufs d’incubation sur le
contingentement, C.Q.L.R., c.M-35.1, r. 223
Règlement sur les quotas des producteurs d'œufs de
consommation du Québec, C.Q.L.R., c. M-35.1, r. 239

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Joint plans for the production and marketing of agricultural
products and producers marketing boards may be
administered by professional syndicates. Only Canadian
citizens may ask to form a professional syndicate and be
members of its administrative council.

2.

Only Canadian citizens may have access to the reserve for
new hatching egg producers, are eligible to certain programs
and can benefit from eggs quotas transfers outside of the
centralised system.

914

Reservation I-PT-140
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 882

Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Marine Products Processing Act, C.Q.L.R., c. T-11.01

Description:

Investment
The Minister may, by regulation, prescribe the minimum
processing standards with which an operator must comply for
the preparation or canning of a marine product. The standards
may vary according to the marine product.

915

Reservation I-PT-141
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Cultural goods and property

Industry Classification:

CPC 963

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Cultural Heritage Act, C.Q.L.R., c. P-9.002

Description:

Investment
1. A heritage cultural property may include a heritage
document, immovable, object or site. After obtaining the
opinion of the Conseil du patrimoine culturel, the Minister
of Culture and Communications may classify all or part of
any heritage property the knowledge, protection,
enhancement or transmission of which is in the public
interest.
2. Authorisation from the Minister is required when a person,
natural or legal, wishes to sell or give away a classified
heritage document or object to a government or department
or agency of a government, other than the Gouvernement du
Québec, a natural person who is not a Canadian citizen or
permanent resident or to a legal person that does not have a
principal place of business in Québec. Classified heritage
property in the domain of the State may not be sold,
conveyed by emphyteusis or given away without the
Minister's authorisation. In other cases of alienation, prior
written notice is required.

916

Reservation I-PT-142
Sector:

Community, social and personal services

Sub-Sector:

Funeral, cremation and undertaking services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9703

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting medical laboratories, organ and tissue
conservation and the disposal of human bodies, C.Q.L.R., c. L0.2
Regulation respecting the application of the Act respecting
medical laboratories, organ and tissue conservation and the
disposal of human bodies, C.Q.L.R., c. L-0.2, r. 1
An Act respecting prearranged funeral services and sepultures,
C.Q.L.R., c. A-23.001

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

A natural person seeking a permit to act as a funeral
director, on his or her behalf or for a legal person,
partnership or an association having its head office in
Québec, must have resided in Québec for at least 12
months preceding the request.

2.

A person seeking a permit to practise embalming,
cremation or thanatopraxy is not subject to the requirement
to reside in Québec provided that he or she resides in
Canada.

917

Reservation I-PT-143
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Taxi services

Industry Classification:

CPC 71221

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting transportation services by taxi, C.Q.L.R., c.
S-6.01
Taxi Transportation Regulation, C.Q.L.R., c. S-6.01, r. 3,
Highway Safety Code, C.Q.L.R., c. C-24.2
Regulation respecting road vehicle registration, C.Q.L.R., c. C24.2, r. 29

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

For a taxi owner’s permit to be issued, assigned or
transferred from the Commission des transports du
Québec, a natural person must be a Canadian citizen or
permanent resident. To be issued a taxi driver’s permit by
the Société de l’assurance automobile du Québec, a natural
person must be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident.

2.

There is a limit of 20 taxi owner’s permits per person.

918

Reservation I-PT-144
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Interurban special transportation
Transportation of other freight

Industry Classification:

CPC 71214, 71239

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Highway Safety Code, C.Q.L.R., c. C-24.2
Regulation respecting road vehicle registration, C.Q.L.R., c. C24.2, r. 29

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Under the International Registration Plan (“IRP”), carriers only
pay registration fees once, to the base jurisdiction, which in turn
ensures travel for duly licenced vehicles in other jurisdictions.
This system of apportionable fees works on the basis of the
distance travelled in each jurisdiction. An IRP registration
certificate is recognised by Canadian provinces and United
States of America’s states. An apportioned registration will only
be granted to a person having a place of business in Québec and
where at least one of its vehicles accrues kilometres.

919

Reservation I-PT-145
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Bus transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 71211, 71212, 71213, 71214, 71222

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Transport Act, C.Q.L.R., c. T-12
Bus Transportation Regulation, C.Q.L.R., c.T-12, r. 16

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In issuing bus transportation permits, the Commission des
Transports du Québec may apply criteria of public need in the
territory to be served. It may also consider if the issuance of the
permit requested by the applicant is not likely to entail the
disappearance of any other bus transport service or appreciably
affect the quality thereof.

920

Reservation I-PT-146
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transportation

Industry Classification:

CPC 71231, 71232, 71233, 71234

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Ministère des Transports, C.Q.L.R., c. M28
Transport Act, C.Q.L.R., c. T-12
Regulation respecting the brokerage of bulk trucking services,
C.Q.L.R., c. T-12, r. 4
An Act respecting owners, operators and drivers of heavy
vehicles, C.Q.L.R., c. P-30.3

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Minister of Transport determines the conditions that a
heavy-vehicle operator located outside of Québec but in
the territory of a party to the Agreement on Internal Trade
must meet to register in the bulk trucking register. The
total number of registration allowed is limited. A heavyvehicle operator located outside of Québec has to maintain
its principal establishment outside of Québec and its
registration cannot be transferred.

2.

Participation in the performance of a road construction,
repair or maintenance work contract awarded by the
Minister of Transport, is limited to small bulk trucking
enterprises that subscribe to the brokerage service of an
association holding a brokerage permit, for a minimum of
50 per cent of the transportation required that has to be
offered to the brokerage permit holder. Bulk trucking
enterprises that are not registered into the register will only
have access to the remaining 50 per cent of the
transportation needed if the brokerage permit holder
accepts the offer to transport 50 per cent of the
transportation required.

3.

To obtain a brokerage permit, a non-profit legal person or
a cooperative shall demonstrate that it represents at least

921

35 per cent of the operators of heavy-vehicles that are
registered in the bulk trucking register and that have its
principal establishment in the zone for which the permit is
applied for. An operator shall subscribe for brokerage
services in the brokerage zone where he or she has his or
her principal establishment or in the zone determined by
regulation.

922

Reservation I-PT-147
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Maritime transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 72211

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Société des Traversiers du Québec,
C.Q.L.R., c. S-14
Transport Act, C.Q.L.R., c. T-12

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Commission des Transports du Québec shall issue or
transfer a permit for the transport of passengers by water to
a person who applies therefor on the form used by the
Commission, if it considers that the person establishes the
real and urgent necessity for an additional service for each
of the ships to be used, if applicable, where he or she
offers passengers a ferry service competing with another
ferry service.

2.

No person may be a member of the board of directors
unless he is domiciled in Québec.

923

Reservation I-PT-148
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Sporting and other recreational services

Industry Classification:

CPC 964

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting safety in sports, C.Q.L.R., c. S-3.1
Regulation respecting combat sports, C.Q.L.R., c. S-3.1, r. 11
Regulation respecting combat sports licensing, C.Q.L.R., c. S3.1, r. 7

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
With respect to professional combat sport, a person who is not
domiciled in Canada cannot obtain a yearly referee’s or judge’s
permit but may obtain a permit valid for a specific sports event.

924

Reservation I-PT-149
Sector:

Travel agency, tour operator and tourist guide services

Sub-Sector:

Travel agencies
Tour operation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7471

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Travel Agents Act, C.Q.L.R., c. A-10
Regulation respecting travel agents, C.Q.L.R., c. A-10, r. 1

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A natural person applying for a travel agent licence on his or her
own account must establish and maintain a principal
establishment in Québec. The association, partnership or person
on whose behalf the licence is applied for must establish and
maintain a principal establishment in Québec. A principal
establishment is an establishment in which the operations of the
licencee are principally performed.

925

Reservation I-PT-150
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Cooperatives Act, C.Q.L.R., c. C-67.2
Regulation under the Cooperatives Act, C.Q.L.R., c. C-67.2, r. 1

Description:

Investment
1.

The Cooperatives Act places constraints on the issue,
transfer and ownership of shares. Membership of the
cooperative is subject to the member actually using the
services offered by the cooperative and to the
cooperative’s ability to provide him with them. The
Cooperatives Act also stipulates that every member of the
cooperative or representative of a legal person or
partnership that is a member may be a director. The head
office of a cooperative, a federation or a confederation
must at all times be located in Québec.

2.

A cooperative, a federation or a confederation must carry
on with its members a proportion of its total business
according to a percentage determined by government
regulation. In the case of a solidarity cooperative, this
proportion is calculated separately for the members who
are users of the cooperative and for those who are workers
of the cooperative.

926

Reservation I-PT-151
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Products of wood, cork, straw and plaiting materials
Pulp, paper and paper products

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 31, 32

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Ministère des Ressources Naturelles et de
la Faune, C.Q.L.R., c. M-25.2
Sustainable Forest Development Act, C.Q.L.R., c. A-18.1

Description:

Investment
1.

All timber harvested in the domain of the State, including
biomass volumes, must be completely processed in
Québec. However, the Government may, on the
conditions it determines, authorise the shipment outside
Québec of incompletely processed timber from the
domain of the State if it appears to be contrary to the
public interest to do otherwise.

2.

The Minister may take measures for the development of
lands or forest resources in the domain of the State that
are under his or her authority in order to encourage
regional development or implement any other related
policy.

927

Reservation I-PT-152
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Horse racing

Industry Classification:

CPC 02113, 96492

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting racing, C.Q.L.R., c. C-72.1
Rules respecting the breeding of Québec Standardbred race
horses, C.Q.L.R., c. C-72.1, r. 6
Rules respecting Certification, C.Q.L.R., c. C-72.1, r. 1
Rules respecting betting houses, CQLR, c. C-72.1, r. 8
Rules respecting Standardbred horse racing, C.Q.L.R., c. C72.1, r. 3
Regulation respecting betting horses, C.Q.L.R., c. C-72.1, r.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only a Canadian citizen may apply for a licence to operate
a race track, a licence to hold races or a licence to operate a
betting house.

2.

A person who applies for registration of a Standardbred
stallion with the Régie des alcools, des courses et des jeux
(“RACJ”) must be a resident of Québec for at least 183
days.

3.

Only a Québec race horse, as defined in the Rules
respecting the breeding of Québec Standardbred race
horses, can be entitled to a privilege or advantage.

928

Reservation I-PT-153
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Société des loteries du Québec, C.Q.L.R.,
c. S-13.1
An Act respecting the Régie des alcools des courses et des jeux,
C.Q.L.R. chapter R-6.1
An Act respecting lotteries, publicity contests and amusement
machines, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6
Lottery Scheme Rules, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6, r. 12
Rules respecting amusement machines, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6, r. 2
Rules respecting publicity contests, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6, r. 6
Rules respecting video lottery machines, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6, r. 3
Bingo Rules, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6, r. 5

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

A person who applies for a licence to operate a lottery
scheme must be a Canadian citizen or, in the case of a
company or corporation, have an office in Québec.

2.

A person who wishes to obtain an amusement machine
operator’s licence or merchant licence must be a Canadian
citizen and in the case of a corporation, must be
headquartered or have its principal establishment in
Canada and have an office in Québec.

3.

With regard to video lottery machines operated somewhere
other than in a government casino, Régie des alcools, des
courses et des jeux (“RACJ”) may take Canadian
citizenship or residence into account when making rules to
determine the conditions for obtaining prescribed licences
as well as operating standards, restrictions, or prohibitions.
The RACJ may determine the conditions of player
participation, or standards, restrictions, or prohibitions
related to promotion, advertising, or educational programs
pertaining to video lottery machines, which may only

929

apply, in full or in part, to certain categories of individuals.
4.

With respect to bingo, projects for which a charitable or
religious organization applies for an in-hall, media, or
recreational bingo licence must be carried out entirely in
Québec. Individuals or companies that apply for a bingo
supplier’s licence must have an establishment in Québec.

5.

No person may be a member of the board of directors
unless he is domiciled in Québec.

930

Reservation I-PT-154
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services
Beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Société des alcools du Québec, C.Q.L.R.,
c. S-13
Regulation respecting cider and other apple-based alcoholic
beverages, C.Q.L.R., c. S-13, r. 4
Regulation respecting wine and other alcoholic beverages made
or bottled by holders of a wine maker's permit, C.Q.L.R., c. S13, r. 7
Regulation respecting alcoholic beverages made and bottled by
holders of a distiller's permit, C.Q.L.R., c. S-13, r. 3
Regulation respecting the terms of sale of alcoholic beverages
by holders of a grocery permit, C.Q.L.R., c. S-13, r. 6
An Act respecting offences relating to alcoholic beverages,
C.Q.L.R., c. I-8.1
An Act respecting liquor permits, C.Q.L.R., c. P-9.1
Regulation respecting liquor permits, C.Q.L.R., c. P-9.1, r. 5

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Société des alcools du Québec operates as a monopoly
responsible for the importation, distribution, supply,
transport, sale, trade and marketing of alcoholic beverages.

2.

No person may be a member of the board of directors
unless he or she is domiciled in Québec.

931

Reservation I-PT-155
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services
Beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Société des alcools du Québec, C.Q.L.R.,
c. S-13
Regulation respecting the terms of sale of alcoholic beverages
by holders of a grocery permit, C.Q.L.R., c. S-13, r. 6
An Act respecting offences relating to alcoholic beverages,
C.Q.L.R., c. I-8.1

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only those who own an establishment in Québec may
obtain a beer distributor’s, brewer’s, distiller’s, wine
maker’s, cider maker’s, warehouse, small-scale production
or small-scale beer producer’s permit.

2.

Holders of a distiller’s permit may only sell the products
they produce or bottle to Société des alcools du Québec
(“SAQ”), unless they ship such products outside Québec.

3.

Holders of a small-scale production permit may sell the
alcoholic beverages they produce on their production
premises.

932

Reservation I-PT-156
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services
Beverages
Hotel and restaurant services

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 641, 642, 643

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting liquor permits, C.Q.L.R., c. P-9.1
Regulation respecting liquor permits, C.Q.L.R., c. P-9.1, r. 5
Regulation respecting the terms of sale of alcoholic beverages
by holders of a grocery permit, C.Q.L.R., c. S-13, r. 6

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

To obtain a liquor permit under the Act respecting liquor
permits, persons who are not Canadian citizens must have
been residing in Québec as a permanent resident of
Canada, unless they apply for a reunion permit or “Man
and His World” permit as authorised representatives of a
government, country, Province, or State.

2.

Companies or corporations not listed on a Canadian stock
exchange may obtain a permit to sell alcohol only if all
their partners or directors and shareholders who hold ten
per cent or more of shares with full voting rights are
Canadian citizens or have been residing in Québec as a
permanent resident of Canada.

3.

For certain product categories, marketing is carried out by
holders of a grocery licence issued by the Régie des
alcools, des courses et des jeux (“RACJ”). Grocers must
buy authorised alcoholic beverages from an authorised
distributor.

4.

Liquor permit applicants who are not Canadian citizens
must prove that they have lived in Québec for at least one
year. If an applicant is a company or corporation not listed

933

on a Canadian stock exchange, it must prove, for each of
its partners or directors and shareholders who own 10 per
cent or more of shares with full voting rights and are not
Canadian citizens that they have lived in Québec for at
least one year.
5.

The person entrusted to manage the establishment for a
holder of a permit authorising the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on a premise must
have a Canadian social insurance number.

6.

With regard to reunion permits to sell alcohol, when the
proceeds of an event are to be used for the purposes of a
non-profit corporation other than the permit applicant, the
non-profit corporation must have an establishment in
Québec.

934

Reservation I-PT-157
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act Respecting the Régie de l’énergie, C.Q.L.R., c. R-6.01
Hydro-Québec Act, C.Q.L.R., c. H-5

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Québec (including through the Régie de l’énergie and
Hydro-Québec) may fix, determine and modify rates,
tariffs, prices and other conditions relating to the
production, purchase, transportation, transmission, supply,
distribution, and sale of electric power.

2.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, these
measures may involve discretionary decisions based on
various factors, the imposition of performance
requirements or discrimination in favor of residents of
Québec or entities established in accordance with the laws
of Canada or a province or territory thereof and having a
place of business or substantive business operations within
Québec.

935

Reservation I-PT-158
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the exportation of electric power, C.Q.L.R., c.
E-23
An Act Respecting the Régie de l’énergie, C.Q.L.R, c. R-6.01

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Hydro-Québec, municipal electric power systems, and
private electric power systems are holders of exclusive
electric power distribution rights.

2.

The exportation of electric power from Québec is
prohibited. The Gouvernement du Québec may
nevertheless authorise, by order, on the conditions and in
the cases it determines, a contract for the exportation of
electric power from Québec.

3.

Contracts relating to the exportation of electric power by
Hydro-Québec, including wheeling under a transportation
service agreement, must be submitted to the Government
for authorisation in the cases determined by the
Government and are subject to such conditions as the
Government may then determine.

936

Reservation I-PT-159
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services involving own or leased property
Real estate services on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, 822

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial - Québec

Measures:

Real Estate Brokerage Act, C.Q.L.R., c. C-73.2

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Real Estate Brokerage Act imposes residency requirements
to brokers and agencies. Therefore, a broker must have an
establishment in Québec. In the case of a broker who acts on
behalf of an agency, the broker’s establishment is the agency’s
establishment. An agency must have an establishment in
Québec.

937

Reservations applicable in Sasketchewan
Reservation I-PT-160
Sector:

Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles

Sub-Sector:

Wholesale trade services
Retail sales of motor vehicles including automobiles and other
road vehicles

Industry Classification:

CPC 61111, 61112

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Motor Dealers Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. M-22
The Motor Dealers Regulations, R.R.S. c. M-22 Reg. 1

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
No licence as a motor vehicle dealer shall be granted unless the
applicant for the licence maintains in the Province a place of
business satisfactory to the registrar and from which he or she
conducts his or her business, or a portion of his or her business,
as a dealer.

938

Reservation I-PT-161
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan), 1994, c. F-16.1
The Fisheries Regulations, c. F-16.1 Reg. 1
Commercial Fishing Licensee Eligibility Requirements, Policy
Number 3420.02
Commercial Fishing Co-operatives, Policy Number F & W
2003.2
Commercial Net Fishing Licence Eligibility Requirements
Guidelines

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only a Saskatchewan resident is eligible to obtain a commercial
fishing licence. Licences may be restricted to residents of the
region of a local fishery.

939

Reservation I-PT-162
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Legal Profession Act, 1990, S.S. 1990-91, c. L-10.1
Rules of the Law Society of Saskatchewan

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Canada
are eligible for membership in the Law Society of
Saskatchewan as a student of law or lawyer. Only
members of the Law Society of Saskatchewan holding a
subsisting certificate of practice can practice law in
Saskatchewan.

2.

A person who has engaged in the active practice of law in
another jurisdiction of Canada may, upon meeting certain
conditions, be admitted as a member without having met
the normal requirements. Occasional appearance
memberships are available only to persons who are
Canadian citizens or permanent residents of Canada and
who are qualified to practice law in another jurisdiction of
Canada.

940

Reservation I-PT-163
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Notaries Public Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. N-8
The Commissioners for Oaths Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. C-16

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Only Canadian citizens residing within Saskatchewan can
be appointed a notary public for Saskatchewan.

2.

Only Canadian citizens can be appointed
commissioner for oaths in and for Saskatchewan.

941

as

a

Reservation I-PT-164
Sector:

Tourism

Sub-Sector:

Other – services incidental to hunting
Services incidental to fishing
Tourist guide agencies
Own-account hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472, 8813, 8820, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Wildlife Act, 1998, S.S. c. W-13.12
The Wildlife Regulations, c. W13.1 Reg. 1
The Outfitter and Guide Regulations, 2004, c. N-3.1 Reg. 3

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A person who wishes to hold an outfitter’s licence must be a
Saskatchewan resident and have a head office in Saskatchewan.

942

Reservation I-PT-165
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services involving own or leased property
Real estate services on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 8210, 822

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Real Estate Act, S.S. 1995, c. R-1.3
The Real Estate Commission policies and bylaws

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A brokerage and person named in a certificate of registration as
a brokerage must have an office in Saskatchewan and is required
to maintain trust accounts in a financial institution in
Saskatchewan for the deposit of all money received in
connection with trades in real estate.

943

Reservation I-PT-166
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting
Tourist guide agencies
Own-account hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472, 8813, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Wildlife Act, 1998, S.S. c.W-13.12
The Wildlife Regulations, c.W13.1 Reg. 1

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

A fur licence holder must be a Saskatchewan resident.

2.

A Saskatchewan resident is a Canadian resident who has a
principal residence in Saskatchewan and has resided in the
Province for the three months preceding the date of the
application for a licence.

944

Reservation I-PT-167
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, S.S.1997, c. A-18.011
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority Policy
The Slot Machine Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. S-50
The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, S.S. 1994, c. S18.2
The Interprovincial Lotteries Act, 1984, S.S. 1983-84, c. I-12.01

Description:

Investment
Only gaming equipment, including video lottery terminals and
slot machines, owned or leased by the Government of
Saskatchewan may be operated in Saskatchewan.

945

Reservation I-PT-168
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Passenger Transportation
Interurban scheduled bus passenger transportation
Non-scheduled motor buses, chartered buses and tour and
sightseeing buses

Industry Classification:

CPC 71213, 71222, 71223

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Traffic Safety Act, S.S. 2004, c. T-18.1
The Operating Authority Regulations, 1990, c. M-21.2 Reg. 1
Policies of the Highway Safety Board

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

An Operating Authority Certificate is required by persons
operating commercial or business use vehicles for the
purpose of transporting passengers for hire within or
outside of the Province.

2.

When considering an application for an operating authority
certificate or an amendment to an Operating Authority
Certificate, the Highway Safety Board may consider if
public business will be promoted by the proposed
undertaking.

3.

Public business may be measured through a public
convenience and needs test which includes:
(a)

examination of the adequacy of current levels of
service;

(b)

market conditions establishing the requirement for
expanded service;

(c)

the effect of new entrants on public convenience,
including the continuity and quality of service; and

(d)

fitness, willingness and ability of the applicant to
provide proper service.

946

Reservation I-PT-169
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Business Corporations Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. B-10
Private Acts of the Legislature of Saskatchewan establishing
corporate bodies

Description:

Investment
1. At least 25 per cent of the directors of a corporation must be
resident Canadians (such as a Canadian citizen or permanent
resident), but if a corporation has fewer than four directors,
at least one director must be a resident Canadian.
2. If none of the directors of a corporation resides in
Saskatchewan, the corporation shall appoint an attorney
pursuant to comply with the Act as if the corporation were
an extra-provincial corporation.
3. Directors of a corporation may appoint from their number a
managing director who is a resident Canadian or a
committee of directors and delegate to such managing
director or committee any of the powers of the directors.
4. If the directors of a corporation appoint a committee of
directors, at least 25 per cent of the members of the
committee must be resident Canadians.
5. Constraints may be placed on the transfer and ownership of
shares in corporations. The object is to permit corporations
to meet Canadian ownership requirements, under certain
federal and provincial laws, in sectors where ownership is
required as a condition to operate or to receive licences,
permits, grants, payments, or other benefits. In order to
maintain certain Canadian ownership levels, a corporation is
permitted to sell shareholders’ shares without the consent of
those shareholders, and to purchase its own shares on the
open market.

947

Reservation I-PT-170
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Co-operatives Act, 1996, S.S. 1998, c. C-37.3
Private Acts of the Legislature of Saskatchewan establishing
corporate bodies
Practice and Policy of the Registrar of Co-operatives

Description:

Investment
1.

A co-operative must have a registered office in
Saskatchewan.

2.

Membership may be limited to Canadians resident in
Saskatchewan.

3.

There must be at least five Directors and the majority of
Directors must be Canadian residents. Directors are
appointed from amongst the membership of the cooperative.

4.

The registrar may restrict the businesses in which a cooperative may engage in the Province.

948

Reservation I-PT-171
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Non-profit Corporations Act, S.S. 1995, c. N-4.2
Private Acts of the Legislature of Saskatchewan establishing
corporate bodies

Description:

Investment
1.

At least one director of a corporation must reside in
Saskatchewan.

2.

At least 25 per cent of the directors of a corporation must
be resident Canadians (such as a Canadian citizen), but if a
corporation has fewer than four directors, at least one
director must be a resident Canadian.

3.

Directors of a charitable corporation shall not transact
business at a meeting of directors unless a majority of
directors present are resident Canadians.

4.

Directors of a corporation may appoint from their number
a managing director who is a resident Canadian or a
committee of directors and delegate to the managing
director or committee any of the powers of the directors. If
the directors of a corporation appoint a committee of
directors, a majority of the members of the committee
must be resident Canadians.

949

Reservation I-PT-172
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act, S.S.
1986, c. L-0.2
The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations
Regulations, R.R.S. c. L-0.2 Reg 1

Description:

Investment
1.

A labour-sponsored venture capital corporation is required
to invest the proceeds from the issuance of shares
primarily in the equity shares of eligible businesses. To be
eligible, a business must employ no more than 500
employees in Saskatchewan and pay at least 25 per cent of
its salaries and wages to Saskatchewan residents.

2.

Tax credits are limited to persons liable to pay
Saskatchewan provincial and federal income tax.

950

Reservation I-PT-173
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial - Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Community Bonds Act, S.S. 1990-91, c. C-16.1

Description:

Investment
All directors of the proposed community bond corporation are to
be residents of Saskatchewan.

951

Reservation I-PT-174
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land
Products of agriculture
Live animals and animal products

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 02, 531

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, S.S. 1988-89, c.S-17.1
Crown Land Lease Policy (93-10-01)
Community Pasture Policy (93-12-01)

Description:

Investment
1. Only Canadian residents and incorporated agricultural
corporations are unlimited in the farmland holdings that they
can own, control directly or indirectly or otherwise deal
with.
2. A “resident person” means an individual who:
(a)

resides in Canada for at least 183 days in any year; or

(b)

is a Canadian citizen.

3. Non-Canadian residents and non-agricultural corporations
may not have or acquire an aggregate land holding
exceeding ten acres and are restricted in the conditions
under which they may own, control directly or indirectly or
otherwise deal with farmland holdings in Saskatchewan.
4. Non-residents may not acquire an interest in land by
participating in limited partnerships.
5. Livestock producers must be Canadian citizens or landed
immigrants and actively operate or manage a farm and
control a land base in Saskatchewan in order to lease pasture
land.

952

Reservation I-PT-175
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Agriculture, mining and manufacturing
Services incidental to agriculture
Production and distribution services

Industry Classification:

CPC 0291, 0292, 02122, 22, 8811 (other than rental of
agricultural equipment with operator)

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Agri-Food Act, S.S. 2004, c. A-15.21
The Broiler Hatching Egg Marketing Plan Regulations, 1985, c.
N-3, Reg. 1
The Commercial Egg Marketing Plan Regulations, 2006, c. A15.21, Reg. 2
The Milk Marketing Plan Regulations, 2010, c. A-15.21, Reg. 12
The Saskatchewan Chicken Marketing Plan, 1978, S.R. 387/78
The Saskatchewan Turkey Producers’ Marketing Plan, 1975,
S.R. 275/75

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Producers are required to hold a licence in order to produce or
market: broiler hatching eggs; chickens, commercial eggs, milk;
and turkeys. Only licenced producers can own and produce the
commodities associated with each type of quota. Products
produced under that quota must be produced in Saskatchewan.

953

Reservations applicable in Yukon
Reservation I-PT-176
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Income Tax Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.118

Description:

Investment
1.

Under the Yukon Income Tax Act, a Yukon Small Business
Investment Tax Credit of 25 per cent of the purchased
share amount is offered to Yukon residents who invest in
eligible business corporations. Yukon allocates CAD $1
million annually, to distribute on a first come, first served
basis.

2.

Eligible small business corporations must meet certain
criteria including maintaining a permanent establishment
in Yukon, having at least 50 per cent of assets in Yukon,
and paying at least 50 per cent of salaries in Yukon.

954

Reservation I-PT-177
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Legal Profession Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.134

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The following persons are qualified to apply for admission to the
Law Society of Yukon and enrolment as members for the
provision of domestic law:
(a)

a person who has been duly called to the bar of a
province or has been admitted to practice as an
attorney, advocate, barrister or solicitor in a
province; or

(b)

a person who has completed 12 months of service
in Yukon under articles as a student-at-law
approved by the executive.

955

Reservation I-PT-178
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Notary public

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Notaries Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 158

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Every person who seeks enrolment as a notary public must be a
citizen of Canada or a person who has the status of a permanent
resident of Canada.

956

Reservation I-PT-179
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services involving own or leased property
Real estate services on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, 822

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Real Estate Agents Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.188
Regulation, O.I.C., 1977/158, 1981/14, and 1990/136

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Real estate agent applicants must:
(a)

be a resident of Yukon for a period of not less than
three months immediately prior to the application
date; and

(b)

be licenced as a salesman in Yukon for at least one
year prior to submitting an application.

957

Reservation I-PT-180
Sector:

Travel agency, tour operator and tourist guide services

Sub-Sector:

Tourist guide services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Wilderness Tourism Licensing Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 228
General Regulation, O.I.C. 1999/69

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. There are a limited number of licences allocated for the
Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve area. Licences
allocated to Yukon are distributed with preference given to
Yukon residents.
2. The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
wilderness tourism. This may involve, among other things,
the making of measures:
(a)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(b)

to limit market access; and

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers.

958

Reservation I-PT-181
Sector:

Tourism

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to hunting, trapping, outfitting and tourist
guides

Industry Classification:

CPC 8813, 7472, 96419

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Wildlife Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.229
Wildlife Regulations, O.I.C. 2012/84
Trapping Regulation, O.I.C. 1983/283
Parks and Land Certainty Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.165
Hershel Island Park Regulation, O.I.C. 1990/038

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Applicants for outfitting concessions, trapping concessions
and wilderness tourism licences must be a Canadian
citizen or a permanent resident who ordinarily resides in
Canada. Outfitters must be in Yukon during the period
when persons are hunting in his or her concession.

2.

An outfitting certificate is a yearly authorisation which
gives permission to the holder to carry on the business of
outfitting in a specific outfitting concession. An outfitting
certificate is issued to a person who is a holder of the
concession, or if requested, to an eligible corporation
named by the outfitter. The corporation can then offer to
provide guiding services to hunters. Assistant trapper’s
licences and trapping concessions are issued to Yukon
residents only.

3.

The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
tourism, including services incidental to hunting, trapping,
outfitting and tourist guides. This may involve, among
other things, the making of measures:
(a)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(b)

to limit market access; and

959

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers.

960

Reservation I-PT-182
Sector:

Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry

Sub-Sector:

Hides, skins and fur skins, raw
Services incidental to animal husbandry
Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 0297, 8812, 8813

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Wildlife Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 229
Wildlife Regulations, O.I.C. 2012/84
Trapping Regulations, O.I.C. 1982/283
Game Farm Regulations, O.I.C. 1995/15
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

A licence is required for a person to operate a fur farm in
Yukon. Only Yukon residents are eligible for a licence.
Residency is established by residing in Yukon for one
year according to the Wildlife Act.

2.

The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
farming, including raw hides, skins, and fur skins,
services incidental to animal husbandry and services
incidental to hunting. This may involve, among other
things, the making of measures:
(a)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(b)

to limit market access; and

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers.

961

Reservation I-PT-183
Sector:

Land

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land, forest and other wooded land

Industry Classification:

CPC 531, 8811 (other than rental of equipment with operator),
8812

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Lands Titles Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.130
Lands Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 132
Lands Regulation, O.I.C. 1983/192
Lands Act – Regulation to Amend the Lands Regulation, O.I.C.
2012/159
Yukon Agriculture Policy
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

Corporate applicants for agricultural land use must be
incorporated in Canada or Yukon and the principle
shareholders must be Canadian citizens or landed
immigrants who have resided continuously in Yukon for
one year.

2.

To be eligible to apply for agricultural land use, a society
must be registered in Yukon whose officers are Canadian
citizens or landed immigrants and must have resided
continuously in Yukon for one year.

3.

A majority of members of an agricultural association or
cooperative applicants must be Yukon residents.

4.

The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
agriculture, including agricultural land, forest and other
wooded land. This may involve, among other things, the
making of measures:
(a)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

962

(b)

to impose performance requirements;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and boards of directors.

963

Reservation I-PT-184
Sector:

Land

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural land, forest and other wooded land

Industry Classification:

CPC 8811 (other than rental of agricultural equipment with
operator), 8812, 531

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Land Titles Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 130
Lands Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 132
Lands Regulation, O.I.C. 1983/192
Lands Act – Regulation to Amend the Lands Regulation, O.I.C.
2012/159
Grazing Regulations, O.I.C. 1988/171
Yukon Grazing Policy
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c. 7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

2.

In order to apply for a grazing agreement:
(a)

individual applicants must be a Canadian citizen or
have permanent resident status; and have resided in
Yukon for one year prior to applying;

(b)

corporate applicants must have a majority of shares
held by Yukon residents; or

(c)

the majority of members of agricultural association
or cooperative applicants must be Yukon residents.

The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
agriculture, including services incidental to agriculture,
services incidental to animal husbandry, agricultural land,
forest and other wooded land and Crown land leases and
permits. This may involve, among other things, the making
of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

964

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

965

Reservation I-PT-185
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries products

Sub-Sector:

Production, transformation and transport of agricultural products
Food and marine products
Services incidental to fishing
Services incidental to agriculture, forestry and hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 02, 04, 531, 881 (other than rental of agricultural
equipment with operator and 8814), 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Agricultural Products Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 3
Meat Inspection and Abattoir Regulations, O.I.C. 1988/104
Yukon Agricultural Policy
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to agriculture,
including production, marketing, transformation and transport of
agricultural products food and marine products, and services
incidental to fishing. This may involve, among other things, the
making of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors

966

Reservation I-PT-186
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries products

Sub-Sector:

Agricultural, forest and other wooded land
Forestry and logging products

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 531

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Forest Resources Act, S.Y. 2008, c. 15
Forest Resources Regulation, O.I.C. 2010/171
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c. 7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to forestry,
including agricultural, forest and other wooded land, and
forestry and logging products. This may involve, among other
things, the making of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

967

Reservation I-PT-187
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical energy
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Waters Act, S.Y. 2003, c. 19
Waters Regulation, O.I.C. 2003/58
Environment Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 76
Quartz Mining Act, S.Y. 2003, c. 14
Quartz Mining Land Use Regulation, O.I.C. 2003/64
Security Regulation, O.I.C. 2007/77
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1. Yukon reserves the right to set or modify electricity rates.
2. Yukon may make available to Yukon Development
Corporation (or any subsidiary or successor corporation) for
operational purposes any facility or any water power that is
owned by Yukon or under its control.
3. The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to energy,
including electrical energy and services incidental to energy
distribution. This may involve, among other things, the
making of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.
968

Reservation I-PT-188
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Production, transmission, and distribution of electricity
Gas, steam and hot water
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Corporate Governance Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 45
Public Utilities Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 186
Yukon Power Corporation Regulations, O.I.C. 1987/71
Yukon Development Corporation Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 236
Energy Conservation Fund, O.I.C. 1997/91
Energy Conservation Fund Use Regulation, O.I.C. 1998/204
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c. 7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to energy,
including production, transmission, distribution of electricity,
gas, steam and hot water and services incidental to energy
distribution. This may involve, among other things, the making
of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

969

Reservation I-PT-189
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transportation via pipeline transportation of fuels
Transportation of other goods
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Public Utilities Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 186
Yukon Power Corporation Regulations, O.I.C. 1987/71
Oil and Gas Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.162
Oil and Gas Pipeline Regulations
Oil and Gas Disposition Regulations, O.I.C. 1999/147
Oil and Gas Licence Administration Regulations, O.I.C.
2004/157
Oil and Gas Drilling and Production Regulations, O.I.C.
2004/158
Oil and Gas Geoscience and Exploration Regulations, O.I.C.
2004/156
Oil and Gas Royalty Regulations, O.I.C. 2008/25
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.

The Commissioner in Executive Council may designate
any “energy project” (defined to include any oil or gas
pipeline) as a “regulated project”, and allows the Minister
to impose terms and conditions in respect of the project.
The Commissioner in Executive Council may give
directions to Yukon Utilities Board in respect of, among
other things, utility rates and the operations of public
utilities.

2.

The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to
transportation including transportation via pipeline,
transportation of fuels, and transportation of other goods
and services incidental to energy distribution. This may
involve, among other things, the making of measures:

970

(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

971

Reservation I-PT-190
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Oil and gas
Services incidental to energy distribution
Crude petroleum and natural gas
Transport services via pipeline

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Canada-Yukon Oil and Gas Accord
Oil and Gas Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.162
Oil and Gas Pipeline Regulation
Oil and Gas Disposition Regulations, O.I.C. 1999/147
Oil and Gas Licence Administration Regulations, O.I.C.
2004/157
Oil and Gas Drilling and Production Regulations, O.I.C.
2004/158
Oil and Gas Geoscience and Exploration Regulations, O.I.C.
2004/156
Oil and Gas Royalty Regulations, O.I.C. 2008/25
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to energy,
including oil and gas, services incidental to energy distribution,
crude petroleum and natural gas, and transport services via
pipeline. This may involve, among other things, the making of
measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
972

management and board of directors.

973

Reservation I-PT-191
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale trade services
Retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer
stores)
Manufacture and transport of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 7123 (other than
71231, 71232, 71233, 71234), 8841

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Liquor Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 140
Liquor Regulations, O.I.C. 1977/37
Regulations to Amend the Liquor Regulations, O.I.C. 2010/157,
O.I.C.2012/96
Yukon Act, S.C. 2002, c. 7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to alcoholic
beverages, including wholesale trade services, food retailing
services, liquor, wine and beer stores, liquor, wine and beer,
commission agent’s services, production, manufacture and
transportation of alcoholic beverages and retailing services. This
may involve, among other things, the making of measures:
(a)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(b)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(c)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

974

Reservation I-PT-192
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Public Lotteries Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c.179
Lottery Licensing Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 143
Lotteries and Games of Chance Regulations and the Diamond
Tooth Gerties Regulations, O.I.C. 1987/180
Lottery Licensing Act – Regulation to Amend the Lottery and
Games of Chance Regulations, O.I.C. 2012/102
Slot Machine Management Regulations, O.I.C. 2205/32

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to gambling
and betting, including regulating services, suppliers of services,
manufacturing, suppliers of materials, operations and repairs
relating to lottery schemes, amusement machines, video lottery
terminals, games of chance, races, betting theatres, bingo
casinos and promotional contests, and to conduct such activities,
including through territorial monopolies. This may involve,
among other things, the making of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

975

Reservation I-PT-193
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services for pet animals
Other veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Animal Protection Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c .6
Animal Health Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 5
Occupational Training Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 160

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to veterinary
services for pet animals and other veterinary services. This may
involve, among other things, the making of measures:
(a)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence; and

(b)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers.

976

Reservation I-PT-194
Sector:

Research and development services

Sub-Sector:

Research and experimental development services on natural
sciences and engineering
Research and experimental development services on social
sciences and humanities
Interdisciplinary research and experimental development
services

Industry Classification:

CPC 851, 852 (linguistics and languages only), 853

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Scientists and Explorers Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 200
Historic Resources Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 109
Archaeological Sites Regulation, O.I.C. 2003/73
Wildlife Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 229
Wildlife Regulations, O.I.C. 2012/84
Languages Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 133
Yukon Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment Act, S.C.
2003, c.7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The above measures permit the Government of Yukon to
regulate and issue various authorisations relating to research and
development services on natural sciences and engineering, social
sciences and humanities, interdisciplinary research and
experimental developmental services. This may involve, among
other things, the making of measures:
(a)

to impose performance requirements;

(b)

to limit ownership on the basis of nationality or
residence;

(c)

to favour Canadian persons and Canadian service
providers; and

(d)

regarding the nationality or residence of senior
management and board of directors.

977

978

ANNEX I
Schedule of the European Union
Reservations applicable in the European Union (applicable in all Member States of the
EU unless otherwise indicated)
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

EU level - National

Measures:

Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union

Description:

Investment
All companies or firms formed in accordance with the law of a
Member State of the EU and having their registered office,
central administration or principal place of business within the
EU, including those established in the Member States of the EU
by Canadian investors, are entitled to receive the treatment
accorded by Article 54 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union. Such treatment is not accorded to branches or
agencies of companies or firms established outside the EU.
Treatment granted to companies or firms formed by Canadian
investors in accordance with the law of a Member State of the
EU, and having their registered office, central administration or
principal place of business within the EU, is without prejudice to
any conditions or obligations, consistent with Chapter Eight
(Investment), which may have been imposed on such companies
or firms when they established in the EU and which shall
continue to apply.

Sector:

Research and development services

Sub-Sector:

Research and experimental development services on natural
sciences and engineering, interdisciplinary research and
experimental development services

Industry Classification:

CPC 851, CPC 853

979

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

All currently existing and all future EU research or innovation
framework programmes, including all the FP7 Rules for
Participation and regulations pertaining to Joint Technology
Initiatives (JTIs),art. 185 Decisions, the Competitiveness and
Innovation Programme (CIP) and the European Institute for
Innovation and Technology (EIT), as well as existing and future
national, regional or local research programmes.

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For publicly funded research and development (R&D) services
benefitting from funding provided by the EU at EU level,
exclusive rights or authorisations may only be granted to
nationals of the Member States of the EU and to juridical
persons of the EU having their registered office, central
administration or principal place of business in the EU.
For publicly funded R&D services benefitting from funding
provided by a Member State exclusive rights or authorisations
may only be granted to nationals of the Member State of the EU
concerned and to juridical persons of the Member State
concerned having their headquarters in that Member State.
This reservation is without prejudice to the exclusion of
procurement by a Party, subsidies, or governmental support for
trade in services in Articles 8.14(5)(a) and (b), and 9.2(2)(f) and
(g) respectively.

Sector:

Health, social and education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 92, CPC 93

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

As set out in the Description element

980

Description:

Investment
Any Member State of the EU, when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity providing health, social or
education services, may prohibit or impose limitations on the
ownership of such interests or assets, and on the ability of
owners of such interests and assets to control any resulting
enterprise, by investors of Canada or of a third country or their
investments. With respect to such a sale or other disposition, any
Member State of the EU may adopt or maintain any measure
relating to the nationality of senior management or members of
the boards of directors, as well as any measure limiting the
number of suppliers.
For purposes of this reservation:
(a) any measure maintained or adopted after the date of entry
into force of this Agreement that, at the time of the sale or other
disposition, prohibits or imposes limitations on the ownership of
equity interests or assets or imposes nationality requirements or
imposes limitations on the numbers of suppliers described in this
reservation shall be deemed to be an existing measure; and
(b) "state enterprise" means an enterprise owned or controlled
through ownership interests by any Member State of the EU and
includes an enterprise established after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement solely for the purposes of selling or
disposing of equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state
enterprise or governmental entity.

Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Performance requirements

Level of Government:

EU level

Measures:

Regulation 2007/1234/EC of 22 October 2007 establishing a
common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific
provisions for certain agricultural products (Single CMO
Regulation)

Description:

Investment
The intervention agencies designated by the Member States of

981

the EU shall buy cereals which have been harvested in the EU.
No export refund shall be granted on rice imported from and reexported to Canada or any third country. Only EU rice producers
may claim compensatory payments.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8621

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 26 June 2013 on statutory audits of annual
accounts and consolidated accounts
Directive 2006/43/EC on statutory audits of annual accounts
and consolidated accounts

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The competent authorities of a Member State of the EU may
recognise the equivalence of the qualifications of an auditor
who is a national of Canada or of any third country in order
to approve them to act as a statutory auditor in the EU
subject to reciprocity.

Sector:

Communications services

Sub-Sector:

Postal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 71235, part of CPC 73210, part of 751,

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

EU level - National – Regional

Measures:

Directive 97/67/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 15 December 1997 on common rules for the
development of the internal market of Community postal
services and the improvement of quality of service, as amended
by Directive 2002/39/EC and Directive 2008/06/EC

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
982

In the EU, the organisation of the siting of letter boxes on the
public highway, the issuing of postage stamps, and the provision
of the registered mail service used in the course of judicial or
administrative procedures may be restricted in accordance with
national legislation.
Licensing systems may be established for those services for
which a general Universal Service Obligation exists. These
licences may be subject to particular universal service
obligations or a financial contribution to a compensation fund.

983

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for air transport

Industry Classification:

Rental of aircraft

Type of Reservation:

CPC 7461, CPC 7469, CPC 83104
National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

Regulation 2008/1008/EC of 24 September 2008 on common
rules for the operation of air services in the Community
Directive 1996/67/EC of 15 October 1996 on access to the
groundhandling market at Community airports
Regulation 2009/80/EC of 14 January 2009 on a Code of
Conduct for computerised reservation systems

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Aircraft used by EU air carriers must be registered in the
Member State of the EU licensing the carrier or, if the licensing
Member State of the EU so allows, elsewhere in the EU. To be
registered, aircraft may be required to be owned either by natural
persons meeting specific nationality criteria or by enterprises
meeting specific criteria regarding ownership of capital and
control.
By exception, aircraft registered in Canada may be leased by a
Canadian air carrier to an air carrier of the EU under certain
circumstances – for the air carrier of the EU’s exceptional needs,
seasonal capacity needs, or needs to overcome operational
difficulties, which cannot reasonably be satisfied through leasing
aircraft registered within the EU, and subject to obtaining the
approval for a limited duration from the Member State of the EU
licensing the air carrier of the EU.
For groundhandling services, establishment within the EU
territory may be required. The level of openness of
groundhandling services depends on the size of airport. The
number of suppliers in each airport may be limited. For “big
airports”, this limit may not be less than two suppliers. For
greater certainty, this does not affect the EU’s rights and
obligations under the Agreement on Air Transport between
Canada and the European Community and its Member States.
For airport operations, establishment within the EU is required.
984

Airport operation services may be subject to individual
concession or licence from public authorities. Special approval
from the competent authority may be needed for the holder of
the licence or the concession to transfer the operation licence or
concession in total or in part to a third party.
With respect to computer reservation system (CRS) services,
where EU air carriers are not accorded, by CRS services
suppliers operating outside the EU, equivalent (meaning nondiscriminatory) treatment to that provided in the EU, or where
EU CRS services suppliers are not accorded, by non-EU air
carriers, equivalent treatment to that provided in the EU,
measures may be taken to accord equivalent treatment,
respectively, to the non-EU air carriers by the CRS services
suppliers operating in the EU, or to the non-EU CRS services
suppliers by EU air carriers.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Internal waterways transport
Supporting services for internal waterways transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 722, part of CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

EU level

Measures:

Council Regulation (EEC) No 3921/91 of 16 December 1991
laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers
may transport goods or passengers by inland waterway within a
Member State
Council Regulation (EC) No 1356/96 of 8 July 1996 on common
rules applicable to the transport of goods or passengers by inland
waterway between Member States with a view to establishing
freedom to provide such transport services
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2919/85 of 17 October 1985
laying down the conditions for access to the arrangements under
the Revised Convention for the navigation of the Rhine relating
to vessels belonging to the Rhine Navigation

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Goods or passenger transport operations by inland waterway
may only be provided by an operator that fulfils the following
985

conditions:
(a)

is established in a Member State of the EU,

(b)
is entitled there to carry out the (international) transport
of goods or passengers by inland waterway, and
(c)
uses vessels registered in a Member State of the EU or in
possession of a certificate of membership of a fleet of a Member
State of the EU.
In addition, the vessels must be owned by natural persons
domiciled in a Member State of the EU and who are nationals of
a Member State of the EU, or owned by legal persons registered
in a Member State of the EU and the majority of whom are
nationals of a Member State of the EU. Derogations from the
majority ownership requirement may exceptionally be provided.
In Spain, Sweden and Finland there is no legal distinction
between maritime and internal waterways. The regulation of
maritime transport applies equally to internal waterways.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Rail transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 711

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

Council Directive 95/18/EC of 19 June 1995 on the licensing of
railway undertakings
Directive 2004/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on safety on the Community's railways
and amending Council Directive 95/18/EC on the licensing of
railway undertakings and Directive 2001/14/EC on the allocation
of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for
the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification (Railway
Safety Directive)
Council Directive 2006/103/EC of 20 November 2006 adapting
certain Directives in the field of transport policy, by reason of
the accession of Bulgaria and Romania
Directive 2007/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 October 2007 amending Council Directive
91/440/EEC on the development of the Community’s railways
and Directive 2001/14/EC on the allocation of railway
infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of
986

railway infrastructure
Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of rail transport services requires a licence, which
can only be granted to railway undertakings established in a
Member State of the EU.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Other transport services (provision of combined transport
services)

Industry Classification:

CPC 711,CPC 712, CPC 7212, CPC 7222, CPC 741, CPC 742,
CPC 743, CPC 744, CPC 745, CPC 748, CPC 749

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

Directive 1992/106/EEC of 7 December 1992 on the
establishment of common rules for certain types of combined
transport of goods between Member States

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
With the exception of Finland, only hauliers established in a
Member State of the EU who meet the conditions of access to
the occupation and access to the market for transport of goods
between Member States of the EU may, in the context of a
combined transport operation between Member States of the EU,
carry out initial or final road haulage legs which form an integral
part of the combined transport operation and which may or may
not include the crossing of a frontier.
Limitations affecting any given modes of transport apply.
Necessary measures can be taken to ensure that the motor
vehicle taxes applicable to road vehicles routed in combined
transport are reduced or reimbursed.

Sector:

Supporting services for all modes of transport

Sub-Sector:

Customs clearance services

Industry Classification:

part of CPC 748

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

987

Market access
Level of Government:

EU level - National - Regional

Measures:

Regulation 1992/2913/EEC of 12 October 1992
establishing the Community Customs Code, and subsequent
amendments

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Customs clearance services may only be provided by EU
residents.
***

988

Reservations applicable in Austria
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition, purchase, rental or leasing of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Regional (Sub-national)

Measures:

Burgenländisches Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 25/2007
Kärntner Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 9/2004
NÖ- Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. 6800
OÖ- Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 88/1994
Salzburger Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 9/2002
Steiermärkisches Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 134/1993
Tiroler Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 61/1996
Voralberger Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 42/2004
Wiener Ausländergrundverkehrsgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 11/1998

Description:

Investment
The acquisition, purchase and rental or leasing of real estate by
non-EU natural persons and enterprises requires authorisation by
the competent regional authorities (Länder). Authorisation will
only be granted if the acquisition is considered to be in the public
(in particular economic, social and cultural) interest.

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Aktiengesetz, BGBL. Nr. 98/1965, § 254 (2)
GmbH-Gesetz, RGBL. Nr. 58/1906, § 107 (2)
Gewerbeordnung, BGBL. Nr. 194/1994, § 39 (2a)

989

Description:

Investment
For the operation of a branch, non-European Economic Area
(EEA) corporations must appoint at least one person responsible
for its representation who is resident in Austria. Executives
(managing directors, natural persons) responsible for the
observance of the Austrian Trade Act (Gewerbeordnung) must
be domiciled in Austria.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Rechtsanwaltsordnung (Lawyers Act) - RAO, RGBl. Nr.
96/1868, art. 1 and 21c

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts. Residency
(commercial presence) is required in order to obtain full
admission to the Bar.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
According to the Lawyers Act, only EEA lawyers or lawyers of
the Swiss Confederation are allowed to provide legal services
through commercial presence. Cross border supply of legal
services by Canadian lawyers (who must be fully qualified in
Canada) is only authorised in respect of public international law
and Canadian law.
For admission to the Bar, required for the practice of EU law and
the law of a Member State of the EU including representation
before courts, nationality of a Member State of the EEA or the

990

Swiss Confederation is required.
Equity participation and shares in the operating result of any law
firm of Canadian lawyers (who must be fully qualified in
Canada) is allowed up to 25 per cent; the rest must be held by
fully fledged EEA lawyers or lawyers of the Swiss
confederation) and only the latter may exercise decisive
influence in the decision making of the law firm which is –
according to Article 1a of the Lawyers Act – in Austria generally
limited to certain forms of association.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and bookkeeping services
Auditing services
Taxation advisory services

Industry Classification:

CPC 862, CPC 863

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Wirtschaftstreuhandberufsgesetz(Public Accountant and
Auditing Profession Act, BGBl. I Nr. 58/1999), § 12, § 65, § 67,
§ 68 (1) 4
Bilanzbuchhaltungsgesetz (BibuG, BGBl. I Nr. 11/2008, § 7, §
11, § 56 and § 59 (1) 4.

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The capital interests and voting rights of foreign accountants,
bookkeepers, auditors, and tax advisers, qualified according to
the law of their home country, in an Austrian enterprise may not
exceed 25 per cent.
The service supplier must have an office or professional seat in
the EEA in order to provide bookkeeping services, and to be
entitled to practice as an auditor or tax advisor according to
Austrian law.
Where the employer of a foreign auditor is not a national of a
Member State of the EU, they must be a member of the relevant
professional body in their home country, where such a body
exists.

991

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Tierärztegesetz (Veterinary Act), BGBl. Nr. 16/, §3 (3) 1

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA may provide
veterinary services. The nationality requirement is waived for
nationals of a non-Member State of the EEA where there is an
agreement with that non-Member State of the EEA providing for
national treatment with respect to investment and cross-border
trade of veterinary services.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Medical services

Industry Classification:

part of CPC 9312

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Medical Act, BGBl. I Nr. 169/1998, §4 (2) and §5 (b), §§ 8(5),
32, 33 and 35
Federal Act Regulating High Level Allied Health Professions,
BGBl. Nr. 460/1992
Federal Act regulating Medical Masseurs lower and upper level,
BGBl. Nr. 169/2002

Description:

Investment
Nationality of a Member State of the EEA or of the Swiss
Confederation is required in order to provide medical services.
Regarding medical services, non-nationals of a Member State of
992

the EEA may apply for the following authorisations:
postgraduate training, medical practice as a general medical
practitioner or specialist in hospitals and penal institutions,
medical practice as a general practitioner in a self-employed
capacity, and medical activities for educational purposes.
This reservation does not apply to dental services or services
provided by psychologists and psychotherapists.

993

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of tobacco

Industry Classification:

CPC 63108

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Tobacco Monopoly Act 1996, § 5 and § 27

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only natural persons may apply for an authorisation to operate as
a tobacconist. Priority is given to nationals of a Member State of
the EEA.

Sector:

Distribution and health services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods
Other services provided by pharmacists

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Apothekengesetz (Pharmacy Law), RGBl.No. 5/1907, §3
Arzneimittelgesetz (Medication Act) BGBL. Nr. 185/1983, §5763

Description:

Investment
The retail of pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the
public may only be carried out through a pharmacy.
Nationality of a Member State of the EEA or the Swiss
Confederation is required in order to operate a pharmacy.
Nationality of a Member State of the EEA or the Swiss
Confederation is required for leaseholders and persons in charge
of managing a pharmacy.

994

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

University of Applied Sciences Studies Act, BGBl I Nr. 340/1993,
§2
University Accreditation Act, BGBL. I Nr. 168/1999, § 2

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of privately funded university level education
services in the area of applied sciences requires an authorisation
from the competent authority, the Council for Higher education
(Fachhochschulrat). An investor seeking to provide an applied
science study programme must have his primary business being
the supply of such programmes, and must submit a needs
assessment and a market survey for the acceptance of the
proposed study programme. The competent Ministry may deny
an authorisation where the programme is determined to be
incompatible with national educational interests.
The applicant for a private university requires an authorisation
from the competent authority (the Austrian Accreditation
Council). The competent Ministry may deny the approval if the
decision of the accreditation authority does not comply with
national educational interests.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Austrian Insurance Supervision Act, §5 (1) 3 (VAG)

Description:

Financial Services
In order to obtain a licence to open a branch office, foreign
insurers must have a legal form corresponding or comparable to
995

a joint stock company or a mutual insurance association in their
home country.
The management of a branch office must consist of at least two
natural persons resident in Austria.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Insurance Supervision Act (VAG), BGBI. Nr. 569/1978, §1 (2)

Description:

Financial Services
Promotional activity and intermediation on behalf of a subsidiary
not established in the EU or of a branch not established in
Austria (except for reinsurance and retrocession) are prohibited.

Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Ski school services
Mountain guide services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 96419

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Regional (Sub-national)

Measures:

Kärntner Schischulgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 53/97
Kärntner Berg- und Schiführergesetz, LGBL. Nr. 25/98

996

NÖ- Sportgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 5710
OÖ- Sportgesetz, LGBl. Nr. 93/1997
Salzburger Schischul- und Snowboardschulgesetz, LGBL. Nr.
83/89
Salzburger Bergführergesetz, LGBL. Nr. 76/81
Steiermärkisches Schischulgesetz, LGBL. Nr.58/97
Steiermärkisches Berg- und Schiführergesetz, LGBL. Nr. 53/76
Tiroler Schischulgesetz. LGBL. Nr. 15/95
Tiroler Bergsportführergesetz, LGBL. Nr. 7/98
Vorarlberger Schischulgesetz, LGBL. Nr. 55/02 §4 (2)a
Vorarlberger Bergführergesetz, LGBL. Nr. 54/02
Wien: Gesetz über die Unterweisung in Wintersportarten,
LGBL. Nr. 37/02

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The operation of ski schools and mountain guide services is
governed by the laws of the 'Bundesländer'. The provision of
these services may require nationality of a Member State of the
EEA. Enterprises may be required to appoint a Managing
Director who is a national of a Member State of the EEA.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport
Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 7221, CPC 7222, CPC 7223, CPC 7224, part of CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senor management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Schifffahrtsgesetz, BGBl. I Nr. 62/1997, §75f

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services
997

Services,

and

For internal waterways transport, nationality of a Member State
of the EEA s required for natural persons in order to set up a
shipping company. A majority of the governing board of each
enterprise must have EEA nationality. A registered company or
permanent establishment in Austria is required. More than 50 per
cent of the business shares and the working capital must be held
by nationals of a Member State of the EEA.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Güterbeförderungsgesetz (Goods Transportation Act), BGBl. Nr.
593/1995; § 5 Gelegenheitsverkehrsgesetz (Occasional Traffic
Act), BGBl. Nr. 112/1996; § 6

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For passenger and freight transportation, exclusive rights or
authorisations may only be granted to nationals of the Member
States of the EU and to juridical persons of the EU having their
headquarters in the EU.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Pipeline transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 713

Type of Reservation:

Senior management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Rohrleitungsgesetz (Law on Pipeline Transport), BGBl. Nr.
411/1975, § 5(1) and (2), §§ 5 (1) and (3), 15, 16

998

Gaswirtschaftsgesetz (Gas Act), BGBl. I Nr. 121/2000, § 14, 15
and 16

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
With regard to natural persons, authorisation is only granted to
nationals of a Member State of the EEA domiciled in the EEA.
Enterprises and partnerships must have their seat in the EEA.
The operator of the network must appoint a Managing Director
and a Technical Director who is responsible for the technical
control of the operation of the network, both of whom must be
nationals of a Member State of the EEA.
The competent authority may waive the nationality and
domiciliation requirements where the operation of the network is
considered to be in the public interest.
For the transportation of goods other than gas and water the
following applies:
1.
With regard to natural persons, authorisation is only
granted to EEA-nationals who must have a seat in Austria; and
2.
Enterprises and partnerships must have their seat in
Austria. An Economic Needs Test or interest test is applied.
Cross border pipelines must not jeopardise Austria's security
interests and its status as a neutral country. Enterprises and
partnerships have to appoint a managing director who must be a
national of a Member State of the EEA. The competent authority
may waive the nationality and seat requirements if the operation
of the pipeline is considered to be in the national economic
interest.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Transmission and distribution of electricity

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 40, CPC 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Regional

Measures:

Steiermärkisches Elektrizitätswirtschafts- und
Organisationsgesetz(ELWOG), LGBl. Nr. 70/2005; Kärntner
Elektrizitätswirtschafts-und Organisationsgesetz(ELWOG),

999

LGBl. Nr. 24/2006
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
With regard to natural persons, authorisation is only granted to
nationals of a Member State of the EEA domiciled in the EEA. If
the operator appoints a managing director or a leaseholder, the
domicile requirement is waived.
Juridical persons (enterprises) and partnerships must have their
seat in the EEA. They must appoint a managing director or a
leaseholder, both of whom must be nationals of a Member State
of the EEA domiciled in the EEA.
The competent authority may waive the domicile and nationality
requirements where the operation of the network is considered to
be in the public interest.
***

1000

Reservations applicable in Belgium
For the purposes of the reservations of Belgium, the national level of government covers
the federal government and the governments of the Regions and the Communities as each
of them holds equipollent legislative powers.
Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Other mining and quarrying

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 14

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

Arrêt Royal du 1er septembre 2004 relatif aux conditions, à la
délimitation géographique et à la procédure d'octroi des
concessions d'exploration et d'exploitation des ressources
minérales et autres ressources non vivantes de la mer territoriale
et du plateau continental

Description:

Investment
The exploration for and exploitation of mineral resources and
other non-living resources in territorial waters and the the
continental shelf are subject to concession. The concessionaire
must be domiciled in Belgium.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

Belgian Judicial Code (Articles 428-508); Royal Decree of 24
August 1970

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal

1001

services in respect of Belgian law, including representation
before courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in
order to obtain full admission to the Bar.
The residency requirement for a foreign lawyer to obtain full
admission to the Bar is at least six years from the date of
application for registration, three years under certain conditions.
Required to have a certificate issued by the Belgian Minister of
Foreign Affairs under which the national law or international
convention allows reciprocity (reciprocity condition).
Representation before the “Cour de Cassation” is subject to
quota.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

Law of July 22nd, 1953 creating an Institute of the Auditors of
Firms and organising the public supervision of the occupation of
auditor of firms, coordinated on April 30th, 2007

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
To be qualified to act in an official capacity as a "firm's auditor",
it is required to maintain an establishment in Belgium where the
professional activity will take place and where acts, documents
and correspondence relating to it will be maintained, and to have
at least one administrator or manager of the company being
firm's auditor and responsible for the management of an
establishment in Belgium.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services
Urban planning and landscape architectural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671,CPC 8674

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

1002

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

Law of February 20, 1939 on the protection of the title of the
architect's profession
Law of 26th June 1963, which creates the Order of Architects
Regulations of December 16th, 1983 of ethics established by
national Council in the Order of Architects (Approved by art. 1st
of A.R. of April 18th, 1985, M.B., May 8th, 1985).

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of architectural services in Belgium requires
control over the execution of jobs.
Foreign architects authorised in their host countries and wishing
to practice their profession on an occasional basis in Belgium are
required to obtain prior authorisation from the Council of Order
in the geographical area where they intend to practice their
activity.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Placement services of personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87202

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National (Regions)

Measures:

Flemish Region: Besluit van de Vlaamse Regering van 10
december 2010 tot uitvoering van het decreet betreffende de
private arbeidsbemiddeling
Walloon Region: Décret du 3 avril 2009 relatif à
l’enregistrement ou à l’agrément des agences de placement
(Decree of 3 April 2009 on registration of placement agencies),
art. 7; Arrêté du Gouvernement wallon du 10 décembre 2009
portant exécution du décret du 3 avril 2009 relatif à
l’enregistrement ou à l’agrément des agences de placement
(Decision of the Walloon Government of 10 December 2009
implementing the Decree of 3 April 2009 on registration of
placement agencies), art. 4
German-speaking Community: Dekret über die Zulassung der
Leiharbeitsvermittler und die Überwachung der privaten
Arbeitsvermittler / Décret du 11 mai 2009 relatif à l'agrément des
1003

agences de travail intérimaire et à la surveillance des agences de
placement privées, art. 6
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Flemish Region: A company having its head office outside the
EEA has to prove that it supplies placement services in its
country of origin.
Walloon Region: A specific type of legal entity (régulièrement
constituée sous la forme d'une personne morale ayant une forme
commerciale, soit au sens du droit belge, soit en vertu du droit
d'un Etat membre ou régie par celui-ci, quelle que soit sa forme
juridique) is required to supply placement services. A company
having its head office outside the EEA has to demonstrate that it
fulfils the conditions as set out in the Decree (for instance on the
type of legal entity) and has to prove that it supplies placement
services in its country of origin.
German-speaking Community: A company having its head
office outside the EEA has to prove that it supplies placement
services in its country of origin and has to fulfill the admission
criteria established by the mentioned decree.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

La Loi du 21 décembre 1990 relative à l'enregistrement des
navires, telle que modifiée par la loi du 3 mai 1999
L’Arrêté royal du 4 avril 1996 relatif à l'enregistrement des
1004

navires et l'entrée en vigueur de la loi du 21 décembre 1990
relative à l'enregistrement des navires, tel que modifié
Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
According to the Belgian ship registration law and decree
provisions, the owner or operator of a ship must be:
(a) an individual who is national of a Member State of the EU;
(b) an individual who is domiciled or resident in Belgium; or
(c) a legal person / body corporate / having its real place of
business in one of the Member States of the EU,
in order to be eligible to register a ship on the national register.
Foreign investors must have their principal office in Belgium in
order to register a vessel on the national shipping register.
The ships have to be operated from Belgium, meaning that the
operating owner or the operator (if different from the owner)
must have a Belgian company number.
A foreign owned vessel may be registered at the request of a
Belgian operator, subject to the consent of the owner and of the
Belgian authorities (Directorate General Maritime Transport in
Brussels - www.mobilt.fgov.belgium).
A foreign-owned vessel may also be registered on the bareboat
charter register (second Belgian register), subject to the consent
of the authorities of the primary register, of the owner and of the
relevant Belgian authorities.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for air transport
Rental of aircraft

Industry Classification:

CPC 83104

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

Arrêté Royal du 15 mars 1954 réglementant la navigation
aérienne

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Private (civil) aircraft belonging to natural persons who are not
nationals of a Member State of the EU or of the EEA may only
be registered if they are domiciled or resident in Belgium
1005

without interruption for at least one year.
Private (civil) aircraft belonging to foreign legal entities not
formed in accordance with the law of a Member State of the EU
or of the EEA may only be registered if they have a seat of
operations, agency or office in Belgium without interruption for
at least one year.

1006

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Air transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 73

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National (Federal State)

Measures:

Arrêté ministériel du 3 août 1994 fixant les conditions de
délivrance des licences d'exploitation aux transporteurs aériens

Description:

Investment
A licence is required to provide air transport services. To obtain
the licence, the air carrier must have at its disposal, owned or
under any type of lease, at least one aircraft registered in his
name on the Belgian register.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for air transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 7461, CPC 7469, CPC 83104

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National (Federal State and Regions)

Measures:

Arrêté Royal du 6 novembre 2010 réglementant l'accès au
marché de l'assistance en escale à l'aéroport de BruxellesNational (art. 18)
Besluit van de Vlaamse Regering betreffende de toegang tot de
grondafhandelingsmarkt op de Vlaamse regionale luchthavens
(art. 14)
Arrêté du Gouvernement wallon réglementant l’accès au marché
de l’assistance en escale aux aéroports relevant de la Région
wallonne (art.14)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For groundhandling services, reciprocity is required.

1007

***

1008

Reservations applicable in Bulgaria
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Commercial Law, art. 17a
Law for Encouragement of Investments, art. 24

Description:

Investment
Foreign legal persons, unless established under the legislation of
a Member State of the EU or the EEA, may conduct business
and pursue activities if established in the Republic of Bulgaria in
the form of a company registered in the Commercial Register.
Establishment of branches is subject to authorisation.
Representative offices of foreign enterprises are to be registered
with Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and may not
engage in economic activity but are only entitled to advertise
their owner and act as representatives or agents.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

All sectors other than mining of uranium and thorium ore

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 10, ISIC rev 3.1 11, ISIC rev 3.112, ISIC rev 3.1 13,
ISIC rev 3.1 14

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:
Measures:

Underground Natural Resources Act
Concessions Act
Law on Privatisation and Post-Privatisation Control

Description:

Investment
Certain economic activities related to the exploitation or use of
State or public property are subject to concessions granted under
1009

the provisions of the Concessions Act or other special
concessions laws.
The activities of prospecting or exploration of underground
natural resources on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria, in
the continental shelf and in the exclusive economical zone in the
Black Sea are subject to permission, while the activities of
extraction and exploitation are subject to concession granted
under the Underground Natural Resources Act.
It is forbidden for companies registered in preferential tax
treatment jurisdictions (that is, off-shore zones) or related,
directly or indirectly, to such companies to participate in open
procedures for granting permits or concessions for prospecting,
exploration or extraction of natural resources, including uranium
and thorium ores, as well as to operate an existing permit or
concession which has been granted, as such oerations are
precluded, including the possibility to register the geological or
commercial discovery of a deposit as a result of exploration.
Commercial corporations in which the Member State or a
municipality holds a share in the capital exceeding 50 per cent,
cannot effect any transactions for disposition of fixed assets of
the corporation, to conclude any contracts for acquisition of
participating interest, lease, joint activity, credit, securing of
receivables, as well as incurring any obligations arising under
bills of exchange, unless permitted by the Privatisation Agency
or the municipal council, whichever is the competent authority.
Without prejudice to Article 8.4, paragraphs 1 and 2, according
to Decision of the National Assembly of the Republic of
Bulgaria of 18 Jan 2012, any usage of hydraulic fracturing
technology that is, fracking, for activities of prospecting,
exploration or extraction of oil and gas, is forbidden by Decision
of the Parliament. Exploration and extraction of shale gas is
forbidden.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Mining of uranium and thorium ores

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 12

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Safe Use of Nuclear Energy Act, Act on Economic and Financial
1010

Relations with Companies Registered in Preferential Tax
Treatment Jurisdictions, Such Companies' Related Parties and
Their Beneficial Owners, Subsurface Resources Act
Description:

Investment
The mining of uranium ore is forbidden by Decree of the
Council of Ministers No. 163 of 20.08.1992.
With regard to mining of thorium ore, the general regime of
concessions for mining applies. In order to participate in
concessions for mining of thorium ore, a Canadian company
must be established according to the Bulgarian Commercial Act
and to be registered in the Commercial Registry. Decisions to
allow the mining of thorium ore are taken on a nondiscriminatory individual case-by-case basis.
The prohibition against companies registered in preferential tax
treatment jurisdictions (that is, off-shore zones) or related,
directly or indirectly, to such companies, from participating in
open procedures for concessions for mining of natural resources
includes uranium and thorium ores.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Attorney Law
Law for Mediation
Law for the Notaries and Notarial Activity

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national

1011

law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
In so far as Canada and its territories and provinces allow
Bulgarian lawyers to represent their nationals under domestic
law, Bulgaria will allow Canadian lawyers to represent a national
of Canada under domestic law under the same conditions and in
cooperation with a Bulgarian lawyer. For this purpose, foreign
lawyers must be admitted to act as an attorney by a decision of
the Supreme Bar Council and registered in the Unified register of
foreign lawyers. Enterprises must be registered in Bulgaria as a
lawyer partnership ("advokatsko sadrujie") or a law firm
("advokatsko drujestvo"). The name of the law firm may only
include the names of the partners, so a foreign firm would not be
able to use its name unless the named partners were registered in
Bulgaria as well.
Full admission to the Bar is allowed only for nationals of a
Member State of the EU or for foreign nationals, who are
qualified lawyers and have obtained their diploma providing the
capacity to practice in a Member State of the EU. For procedural
representation they should be accompanied by a Bulgarian
lawyer.
For legal mediation services, permanent residence is required.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Independent Financial Audit Act

Description:

Investment
"Specialised audit entity" is a company registered under the
Bulgarian Commerce Act, or under the legislation of another
Member State of the EU, or the European Economic Area
Agreement, with its principal subject of activity being the
independent financial audit of financial statements of enterprises,
and three-quarters of its members being registered auditors,
auditors or audit entities from a Member State of the EU, of

1012

good repute, and which is:
(a) a general partnership in which more than half of the partners
are registered auditors, auditors or audit entities from other
Member State of the EU;
(b) a limited partnership in which more than half of the partners
with unlimited liability are registered auditors, auditors or audit
entities from other Member States of the EU; or
(c) a limited liability company in which more than half of the
votes in the General Meeting of the partners and of the capital
belong to registered auditors, auditors or audit entities from other
Member States of the EU.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Taxation advisory services

Industry Classification:

CPC 863

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Accountancy Act
Independent Financial Audit Act
Income Taxes on Natural Persons Act
Corporate Income Tax Act

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is a condition for tax
advisors.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services
Urban planning and landscape architectural services
Engineering services
Integrated engineering services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671, CPC 8672, CPC 8673, 8674

1013

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Spatial Development Act, art. 230

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For projects of national or regional significance, Canadian
investors must act in partnership with or, as subcontractors to,
local investors.
Foreign specialists must have experience of at least two years in
the field of construction, which is not a requirement for national
specialists.
A Bulgarian nationality condition applies to urban planning and
landscape architectural services.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Related scientific and technical consulting services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Cadastre and Property Register Act
Geodesy and Cartography Act

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A professionally competent body is the person (physical or
juridical) that may execute functions pertinent to cadastral
surveying, geodesy and cartography. Establishment is required,
as well as Bulgarian nationality for the natural person carrying
out activities for geodesy, cadastral surveying, and in
cartography when studying movements of the earth crust.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Translation and interpretation services

1014

Industry Classification:

CPC 87905

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Regulation for the legalisation, certification and translation of
documents

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A contract with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is required for
official translations provided by translation agencies.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Technical testing and analyses

Industry Classification:

CPC 8676

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Technical Requirements towards Products Act
Measurement Act
National Accreditation of Compliance Conformity Authorities
Act
Clean Ambient Air Act
Water Act, Ordinance N-32 for the periodical inspection for proof
of technical condition of road transport vehicles

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
In order to provide testing and analyses services, a national of
Canada must be established in Bulgaria according to the Bulgarian
Commercial Act and be registered on the Commercial register.
For the periodical inspection for proof of technical condition of
road transport vehicles, the person should be registered in
accordance with the Bulgarian Commercial Act or the Non-profit
Legal Persons Act, or else be registered in another Member State
of the EU or country from the EEA.
The testing and analysis of the composition and purity of air and
water may be conducted only by the Ministry of Environment and

1015

Water of Bulgaria, or its agencies in co-operation with the
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services
Wholesale and retail trade services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 621, CPC 62228, CPC 62251, CPC 62271, part of
CPC 62272, CPC 62276, CPC 63108, part of CPC 6329

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law of Veterinary Activity, arts. 343, 363, 373
Law for Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons and for Control
over the Toxic Chemical Substances and Their Precursors, art. 6
Law on Control of Exports of Weapons and Dual-Use Items and
Technology, art. 46
Law for the Tobacco and Tobacco Products, arts. 21, 27, 30

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Distribution (wholesale and retail) of petroleum and petroleum
products, gas, precious metals, tobacco, and tobacco products, is
subject to authorisation and may be performed only after
registration under the Commercial Register. Authorisation may
only be given to nationals of a Member State of the EEA or
foreign citizens with permanent residence in BG.
Department stores may be subject to an Economic Needs Test,
depending on the rules of the local municipality.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1016

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Medicinal Products in Human Medicine, arts. 146, 161,
195, 222, 228

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The mail order of pharmaceuticals is prohibited.
The retail of pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the
public may only be carried out through a pharmacy.
Managers of pharmacies must be qualified pharmacists and may
only manage one pharmacy in which they themselves work.
Requirement for permanent residence for pharmacists. A quota
exists for the number of pharmacies which may be owned per
person.

1017

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Primary and secondary education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Public Education Act, art. 12
Law for the Higher Education, paragraph 4 of the additional
provisions

Description:

Investment
This reservation applies to the provision of privately funded
primary and secondary education services, which may only be
supplied by authorised Bulgarian enterprises (commercial
presence is required).
Bulgarian kindergartens and schools having foreign participation
may be established or transformed at the request of associations,
or corporations, or enterprises of Bulgarian and foreign natural
or legal entities, duly registered in Bulgaria, by decision of the
Council of Ministers on a motion by the Minister of Education,
Youth and Science.
Foreign owned kindergartens and schools may be established or
transformed at the request of foreign legal entities in accordance
with international agreements and conventions and under the
provisions above.
Foreign high schools cannot establish subsidiaries in the territory
of Bulgaria. Foreign high schools may open faculties,
departments, institutes and colleges in Bulgaria only within the
structure of Bulgarian high schools and in cooperation with
them.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

1018

Market access
Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Insurance Code, arts. 8, 41, 47b

Description:

Financial Services
Before establishing a branch or agency in Bulgaria to provide
insurance, a foreign insurer or re-insurer must have been
authorised to operate in the same classes of insurance as those it
wishes to provide in Bulgaria in its country of origin.
Local incorporation (no branches) is required for insurance
intermediaries.
Residency requirement for the members of managing and
supervisory body of (re)insurance undertakings and every person
authorised to manage or represent the (re)insurance undertaking.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law of Credit Institutions, art. 2, 17
Code Of Social Insurance, art. 121e
Currency Law, art. 3

Description:

Financial Services
A bank shall be established as a joint-stock company.
The bank shall be managed and represented jointly by at least
two persons, at least one of whom shall be proficient in the
Bulgarian language.
The persons who manage and represent the bank shall manage
the bank by being personally present at its management address.
In order to perform public attraction of deposits or other
renewable resources as well as other services, a bank
headquartered in a non-Member State of the EU is required to
obtain a license from Bulgarian National Bank for taking up and

1019

pursuing of business activities in Bulgaria through a branch.
The financial institution shall be established as a shareholding
company, a limited liability company or a commandite company
with shares and the place of its main business shall be in the
territory of Bulgaria.
Only financial institutions registered in Bulgaria and foreign
financial institutions with a seat in a Member State of the EU
may carry out activity on the territory of Bulgaria.
Pension insurance shall be carried out as a joint-stock company
licensed in accordance with the Code of Social Insurance and
registered under the Commerce Act or under the legislation of
another Member State of the EU (no branches).
The promoters and shareholders of pension insurance companies
may be non-resident legal persons, registered as a social
insurance, commercial insurance or other financial institution
under the national law thereof, if they present bank references
from a first-class foreign bank confirmed by the Bulgarian
National Bank. Non-resident individuals cannot be promoters
and shareholders of pension insurance companies.
The income of the supplementary voluntary pension funds; as
well as similar income directly connected with voluntary pension
insurance carried out by persons who are registered under the
legislation of another Member State of the EU and who may, in
compliance with the legislation concerned, perform voluntary
pension insurance operations, shall not be taxable according to
the procedure established by the Corporate Income Tax Act.
The Chairperson of the Management Board, the Chairperson of
the Board of Directors, the Executive Director and the
Managerial Agent must have a permanent address or hold a
durable residence permit in Bulgaria.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Hotel, restaurants and catering
Travel agencies and tour operators services
Tourist guides services

Industry Classification:

CPC 641, CPC 642, CPC 643, CPC 7471, CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

1020

Market access
Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law For Tourism, arts. 17, 45

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Incorporation (no branches) is required.
Tour operation or travel agency services may be provided by a
person established in a Member State of the EU or in a Member
State of the EEA if, upon establishment in the territory of
Bulgaria, the said person presents a copy of a document
certifying the right thereof to practise such activity and a
certificate or another document issued by a credit institution or
an insurer containing data of the existence of insurance covering
the liability of the said person for damage which may ensue as a
result of a culpable non-fulfilment of professional duties.
The number of foreign managers may not exceed the number of
managers who are Bulgarian nationals, in cases where the public
(state or municipal) share in the equity capital of a Bulgarian
company exceeds 50 per cent.
Nationality condition for tourist guides.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1: 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC5233,
CPC 721,CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1021

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Merchant Shipping Code, arts. 6, 27, 28
Law For the Sea Water, Inland Waterways and Ports of the
Republic of Bulgaria, arts. 116, 116a, 117, 117a
Ordinance No.17/22.01.2013 for carrying goods by inland
waterways

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A seagoing ship is entitled to fly the Bulgarian flag if:
(a)
it is owned by the State;
(b)
it is owned by a Bulgarian natural person or legal entity;
(c)
more than half of the ownership is by Bulgarian natural
persons or legal entities; or
(d)
it is owned by a natural person or legal entity of a
Member State of the EU, provided that, for the performance of
the technical, administrative and other requirements of Bulgarian
legislation in relation to seagoing ships, Bulgarian natural
persons or legal entities or natural persons or legal entities from
a Member State of the EU resident in Bulgaria have been
authorised by the ship owner and are responsible to perform
these tasks on their behalf.
Regarding supporting services for public transport carried out in
Bulgarian ports, in ports having national significance, the right to
perform supporting activities is granted through a concession
contract. In ports having regional significance, this right is
granted by a contract with the owner of the port.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Transport services (passengers and freight) by non-seagoing
vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works
1022

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.10502, CPC 5133, CPC5223, CPC
721, CPC 722, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Merchant Shipping Code
– Law For The Sea Waters, The Internal Water Ways And The
Ports Of The Republic Of Bulgaria
–
– Ordinance for the condition and order for selection of
Bulgarian carriers for carriage of passengers and cargoes under
international treaties
Ordinance 3 for servicing of unmanned vessels

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The carriage and any activities related to hydraulic-engineering
and underwater technical works, prospecting and extraction of
mineral and other inorganic resources, pilotage, bunkering,
receipt of waste, water-and-oil mixtures and other such,
performed by vessels in the internal waters, the territorial sea and
on the inland waterways of the Bulgaria, may only be performed
by vessels flying the Bulgarian flag or vessels flying the flag of
another Member State of the EU.
Services provided to unmanned vessels in Bulgarian ports and
warehouses on the Danube river are provided only through
Bulgarian enterprises (incorporation is required).
The number of the service suppliers at the ports may be limited
depending on the objective capacity of the port, which is decided
by an expert commission, set up by the Minister of Transport,
Information Technology and Communications.
Nationality condition for supporting services. The master and the
chief engineer of the vessel shall mandatorily be nationals of a
Member State of the EU or the EEA, or of the Swiss
Confederation. Not less than 25 per cent of the positions at
management and operational level and not less than 25 per cent
of the positions at order-taking level shall be occupied by
nationals of Bulgaria.

Sector:

Transport
1023

Sub-Sector:

Rail transport
Supporting services for rail transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 711

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:
Description:

National
Law for Railway Transport, arts. 37, 48
Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only nationals of a Member State of the EU may provide rail
transport or supporting services for rail transport in Bulgaria. A
licence to carry out passenger or freight transportation by rail is
issued by the Minister of Transport to railway operators
registered as traders.
***

1024

Reservations applicable in Croatia
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Possession and other Material Rights (OG 91/96, 68/98,
137/99, 22/00, 73/00, 114/01, 79/06, 141/06, 146/08, 38/09 i
153/09)
Agricultural Land Act (OG 152/08, 25/09, 153/09, 21/10, 31/11
and 63/11), art. 2

Description:

Investment
Foreign companies are only allowed to acquire real estate for the
supply of services if they are established and incorporated in
Croatia as legal persons. Acquisition of real estate necessary for
the supply of services by branches requires the approval of the
Ministry of Justice. Agricultural land cannot be acquired by
foreigners.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Legal Profession Act, (OG 9/94, 51/01, 117/08, 75/09, 18/11)

Description:

Cross Border and Investment
Representation of parties before courts can be practised only by the
members of the Bar Council of Croatia (Croatian title
“odvjetnici”). Citizenship requirement for membership in the Bar
Council.
In proceedings involving international elements, parties may be
represented before arbitration courts – ad hoc courts only by
lawyers who are members of the bar associations of other

1025

countries.
Full admission to the Bar, required for legal representation
services, is subject to a nationality condition (nationality of a
Member State of the EU).

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services

Industry Classification:

CPC 862

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Audit Act (OG 146/05, 139/08, 144/12), Art. 3

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Foreign audit firms may provide audit services on the
Croatian territory where they have established a branch.
Auditing may be performed only by legal persons established
in Croatia, or by natural persons resident in Croatia.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services and engineering services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671, CPC 8672, CPC 8673, CPC 8674

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act on Architectural and Engineering Activities in Physical
Planning and Building (OG 152/08, 49/11, 25/13)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A design or project created by a foreign architect or engineer
must be validated by an authorised natural or legal person in
Croatia with regard to its compliance with Croatian Law.

1026

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Veterinary Act (OG 41/07, 55/11), Arts. 89, 106

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only legal and natural persons established for the purpose of
conducting veterinary activities in a Member State of the EU can
provide cross border veterinary services in the Croatia
(Veterinary Act; OG 41/07, 55/11, Article 89).
Only nationals of a Member State of the EU can establish a
veterinary practice in the Croatia (Veterinary Act, OG 41/07;
55/11, Article 106).

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sale of pharmaceuticals and retail sales of medical and
orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Health Care Act (OG 150/08, 71/10, 139/10, 22/11, 84/11,
12/12, 70/12, 144/12)

Description:

Investment
Authorisation is subject to an economic needs test. Main criteria:
population and geographical density of existing pharmacies.

1027

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, CPC 822

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Real Estate Brokerage Act (OG 107/07 and 144/12), Art. 2

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Commercial presence is required to provide real estate services.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Related scientific and technical consulting services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Ordinance on requirements for issuing approvals to legal persons
for performing professional environmental protection activities
(OG No.57/10), Arts. 32-35

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Services of basic geological, geodetic and mining consulting as
well as related environmental protection consulting services in
the territory of Croatia can be carried out only jointly with or
through domestic legal persons.

Sector:

Health services and social services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services
Ambulance services
Residential health facilities other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193, CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1028

Level of Government:
Measures:
Description:

National
Health Care Act (OG 150/08, 71/10, 139/10, 22/11, 84/11,
12/12, 70/12, 144/12)
Investment
Establishment of some privately funded social care facilities may
be subject to needs based limits in particular geographical areas.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Hotels and restaurants
Travel agencies and tour operators services (including tour
managers)
Tourist guide services

Industry Classification:

CPC 641, CPC 642, CPC 643, CPC 7471, CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:

Description:

National
Hospitality and Catering Industry Act (OG 138/06, 152/08,
43/09, 88/10 i 50/12)
Act on Provision of Tourism Services (OG No. 68/07 and 88/10)
Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality requirement for hospitality and catering services in
households and rural homesteads.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,

1029

CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Maritime Act (Pomorski zakonik), Art. 187

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

A seagoing vessel owned by a natural or legal person having
residency or a seat outside the EU may be registered in the
Croatian national register and fly the Croatian flag if the
shipper/company seeking to register the vessel has commercial
presence in Croatia.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Maritime transport services: towing and pushing services
Supporting services for maritime transport
Services auxiliary to all modes of supply
Cargo handling services
Storage and warehousing services
Freight transport agency services
Other supporting and auxiliary transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7214, CPC 741, CPC 742, 745, CPC 741, CPC 742, CPC
748, CPC 749

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act on Maritime Demesne and Sea Ports (OG 158/03, 100/04,
141/06 i 38/09 (Zakon o pomorskom dobru i morskim lukama.
(NN 158/03, 100/04, 141/06 i 38/09)

Description:

Investment
Foreign legal persons must establish a company in Croatia and
must be granted a concession by the port authority following a
public tendering procedure.

1030

***

1031

Reservations applicable in Cyprus
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Immovable Property Acquisition (Aliens) Law (Chapter
109), as amended by laws number 52 of 1969, 55 of 1972, 50 of
1990 and 54(I) of 2003

Description:

Investment
Cypriots or persons of Cypriot origin, as well as nationals of a
Member State of the EU, are allowed to acquire any property in
Cyprus without restrictions.
No foreigner may acquire, otherwise than mortis causa, any
immovable property without obtaining a permit from the Council
of Ministers.
For foreigners, where the acquisition of immovable property
exceeds the extent necessary for the erection of a premises for a
house or professional roof, or otherwise exceeds the extent of
two donums (2676 sq.), any permit granted by the Council of
Ministers shall be subject to such terms, limitations, conditions
and criteria which are set by Regulations made by the Council of
Ministers and approved by the House of Representatives.
A foreigner is any person who is not a citizen of the Republic of
Cyprus, including a foreign controlled company. The term does
not include foreigners of Cypriot origin or non-Cypriot spouses
of citizens of the Republic of Cyprus.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 1110
The Hydrocarbons (Prospecting, Exploration and Exploitation
Law) of 2007, (Law 4(I)/2007) as amended by laws number
126(I) of 2013 and 29(I) of 2014

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1032

National treatment
Level of Government:

National

Measures:
Description:

Investment
The Council of Ministers may, for reasons of energy security,
refuse to allow access to and exercise of the activities of
prospecting, exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons to any
entity which is effectively controlled by Canada or by nationals
of Canada.
No entity may, after the granting of an authorisation for the
prospecting, exploration and production of hydrocarbons, come
under the direct or indirect control of Canada or a national of
Canada without the prior approval of the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers may refuse to grant an authorisation for
the prospecting, exploration and production of hydrocarbons to
an entity which is effectively controlled by Canada or a third
country or by a national of Canada or a third country, where
Canada or the third country does not grant entities of the
Republic of Cyprus or entities of Member States of the EU, in
relation to the access to and exercise of the activities of
prospecting, exploring for and exploiting hydrocarbons,
treatment comparable to that which the Republic of Cyprus or
the Member State of the EU grants entities of Canada or that
third country.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Advocates Law (Chapter 2), as amended by laws number 42 of
1961, 20 of 1963, 46 of 1970, 40 of 1975, 55 of 1978, 71 of
1981, 92 of 1983, 98 of 1984, 17 of 1985, 52 of 1985, 9 of 1989,
175 of 1991, 212 of 1991, 9(I) of 1993, 56(I) of 1993, 83(I) of
1994, 76(I) of 1995, 103(I) of 1996, 79(I) of 2000, 31(I) of 2001,
41(I) of 2002, 180(I) of 2002, 117(I) of 2003, 130(I) of 2003,

1033

199(I) of 2004, 264(I) of 2004, 21(I) of 2005, 65(I) of 2005,
124(I) of 2005, 158(I) of 2005, 175(I) of 2006, 117(I) of 2007,
103(I) of 2008, 109(I) of 2008, 11(I) of 2009, 130(I) of 2009,
4(I) of 2010, 65(I) of 2010, 14(I) of 2011, 144(I) of 2011, 116(I)
of 2012 and 18(Ι) of 2013
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
Residency (commercial presence) and nationality of a Member
State of the EU is required in order to obtain full admission to
the Bar. Only advocates enrolled in the Bar may be partners or
shareholders or members of the Board of Directors in a law
company in Cyprus.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and bookkeeping services
Auditing services, taxation advisory services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, CPC 86213, CPC 86219, CPC 86220,
CPC 863

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Auditors and Mandatory Audit of the Annual and of the
Consolidated Accounts Law of 2009 (Law 42(I)/2009), as
amended by law number 163(I) of 2013

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access is restricted to natural persons. Canadian auditors need to
obtain special license from the Minister of Finance, which is
subject to reciprocity.
The authorisation is also subject to an economic needs test. Main
criteria: the employment situation in the sub-sector. Professional
1034

associations (partnerships) between natural
permitted. No body corporate is allowed.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Technical testing and analyses

Industry Classification:

CPC 8676

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

persons

are

Market access
Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Registration of Chemists Law of 1988 (Law 157/1988), as
amended by laws number 24(I) of 1992 and 20(I) of 2004

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of services by chemists and biologists requires
nationality of a Member State of the EU.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Travel agencies and tour operators services (including tour
managers
Tourist guide services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7471, CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Tourism and Travel Offices and Tourist Guides Law 1995 to
2004 (N.41(I)/1995-2004)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A licence to establish and operate a tourism and
travel company, as well as the renewal of
an operating licence of an existing
company, shall be granted only to EU
natural or legal persons.

1035

No non-resident company except those established in another
Member State of the EU, can provide in the Republic
of Cyprus, on an organised or permanent basis, the
activities referred to under Article 3 of the
abovementioned Law, unless represented by a resident
company.
The provision of tourist guide services requires nationality of a
Member State of the EU.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Merchant Shipping (Registration of Ships, Sales and
Mortgages) Laws of 1963 to 2005 (Law 45/1963), as amended
by laws number 138(I) of 2003, 169(I) of 2004 and 108(I) of
2005

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
A vessel may be registered in the Register of Cyprus Ships only
if:
(a)
More than 50 per cent of the shares of the ship are owned
by nationals of a Member State of the EU, who, if they are not
permanent residents of the Republic of Cyprus, have appointed
an authorised representative in the Republic of Cyprus; or
(b)
The total (100 per cent) of the shares of the ship are
owned by one or more corporations, which have been established
and operate:
1036

(i)
in accordance with the laws of the Republic of Cyprus
and have their registered office in the Republic of Cyprus;
(ii)
in accordance with the laws of any other Member State of
the EU and have their registered office, central administration or
principal place of business within the European Economic Area
and have either appointed an authorised representative in the
Republic of Cyprus or the management of the ship is entrusted in
full to a Cypriot or an EU ship management company having its
place of business in the Republic of Cyprus; or
(iii) outside the Republic of Cyprus or outside any other
Member State of the EU but controlled by nationals of a Member
State of the EU and have either appointed an authorised
representative in the Republic of Cyprus or the management of
the ship is entrusted in full to a Cypriot or an EU ship
management company having its place of business in the
Republic of Cyprus. The corporation is deemed to be controlled
by nationals of a Member State of the EU when more than fifty
per cent of its shares are owned by nationals of a Member State
of the EU or when the majority of the Directors of the
corporation are nationals of a Member State of the EU.
***

1037

Reservations applicable in the Czech Republic
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act No. 95/1999 Coll. (on Conditions relating to the transfer of
agricultural land and forests from the state ownership to
ownership of other entities)
Act No. 503/2012, Coll. on State Land Office

Description:

Investment
Agricultural and forest land can be acquired by foreign natural
persons having permanent residence in the Czech Republic and
enterprises established in the Czech Republic.
Specific rules apply to agricultural and forest land under state
ownership. State agricultural land can be acquired only by Czech
nationals, by municipalities and by public universities (for
training and research). Legal persons (regardless of the form or
place of residence) can acquire state agriculture land from the
state only if a building, which they already own, is built on it or
if this land is indispensable for the use of such building. Only
municipalities and public universities can acquire state forests.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act No. 85/1996 Coll., the Legal Profession Act

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Foreign lawyers admitted to the Czech Bar Association under
section 5a subsection (1) of the Legal Profession Act shall be

1038

entitled to provide legal services in the law of the country in
which they obtained their entitlement to provide legal services,
and international law.
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.

Sector:

Health and social services

Sub-Sector:

Business and production services
Veterinary services
Paramedical personnel
Restorer
Physiotherapists

Industry Classification:

CPC 93191, CPC 932, CPC 96322

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act No. 166/1999 Coll. (Veterinary Act), §58-63, 39
Act No. 381/1991 Coll. (on the Chamber of Veterinary Surgeons
of the Czech Republic), par. 4
Act. 20/1987 Coll., on State monument care
Act. 96/2004 Coll., on conditions of obtaining and recognition of
qualification for the performance of non-medical occupations in
health service and for the due performance of activities related to
the provision of health care

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access is restricted to natural persons only.

1039

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 92390

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act No. 111/1998, Coll. (Higher Education Act), § 39
ACT NO. 561/2004 COLL. ON PRE-SCHOOL, BASIC,
SECONDARY, TERTIARY PROFESSIONAL AND OTHER
EDUCATION (THE EDUCATION ACT)

Description:

Investment
Establishment in the EU is required to apply for state approval to
operate as a privately funded higher education institution. This
reservation does not apply to secondary technical and vocational
education services.

Sector:

Community, social and personal services

Sub-Sector:

Environmental protection services
Recycling services
Packaging

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act. 477/2001 Coll. (Packaging Act) par. 16

Description:

Investment
An authorised package company is only allowed to provide
services relating to packaging take-back and recovery and must
be a legal person established as a joint-stock company

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

1040

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act. 61/2000 on Maritime Navigation (§5, §6 and §28)

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
Operating a ship under the national flag is reserved to nationals
of a Member State of the EU or juridical persons established in a
Member State of the EU or the EEA.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Rail transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 711

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act No. 266/1994 Coll., on Rail Transport

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For passenger and freight transportation and pushing and towing
services by rail, incorporation is required (no branches).
***

1041

Reservations applicable in Denmark
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Danish Act on acquisition of real property
Lovbekendtgørelse nr. 566 af 28. august 1986 om erhvervelse af
fast ejendom (Ministry of Justice Act No. 566 of 28 August
1985), as amended by act No. 1102 of 21 December 1994 and
Order No. 764 of 18 September 1995
Danish Act on Agricultural
landbrugsejendomme)

Description:

Real

Estate

(lov

om

Investment
The Danish Act on Acquisition of Real Property applies to
agricultural land, as the term “real property” refers to all real
estate and thus includes agricultural and rural land.
Only persons who have permanent residence in Denmark or who
have earlier resided permanently in Denmark for at least five
years are able to purchase real estate property in Denmark. This
requirement also applies to enterprises, associations and other
bodies, public or private institutions, foundations and charitable
trusts that have no registered office in Denmark, and to foreign
public authorities.
Other persons must apply to the Ministry of Justice for
permission to purchase real estate property, which will be
permitted if the applicant is going to use the real estate property
as primary residence during the stay in Denmark or for selfemployment in Denmark.
Purchase of real estate property which will be used as secondary
residence or summer house for the applicant will be permitted
only if the person concerned has particularly close relations or
ties to Denmark.
The purchase of real estate property for enterprises, associations
and other bodies, public or private institutions, foundations and
charitable trusts that have no registered office in Denmark will
be permitted where the acquisition is a prerequisite for the
business activities of the purchaser.

1042

The acquisition of agricultural land by private or legal persons is
also governed by the Danish Act on Agricultural Real Estate (lov
om landbrugsejendomme), which imposes restrictions on all
persons, Danish or foreign, when acquiring agricultural property.
Accordingly, any private or legal person, who wishes to acquire
agricultural real estate, must fulfill the requirements in both
laws.
An agricultural holding may be acquired by an individual,
provided that the acquirer - or another person - takes permanent
residence at the holding no later than six month following the
acquisition. There is no limitation on citizenship.
If the acquirer is not a national of one of the Member States of
the EU or the EEA, the acquirer must also have a permit from
the Ministry of Justice, unless the acquirer actually lives in
Denmark or formerly has lived in Denmark for at least five
years.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lovbekendtgørelse nr. 1053 af 29. Oktober 2009 (Act No 1069
of 29 October 2009 on the administration of justice)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State, commercial presence may be required to take one
of the legal forms which are allowed under national law on a
non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may be
reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
Ninety per cent of shares of a Danish law firm must be owned by
lawyers with a Danish licence to practice or law firms registered
in Denmark. Only lawyers with a Danish licence to practice may

1043

sit on the board or be a member of the management of a Danish
law firm. The remaining ten per cent can be owned by other
employees in law firms, who can also sit on the board and be
part of the management of the firm.
Marketing of legal advisory services is restricted to lawyers with
a Danish licence to practice.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and bookkeeping services
Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, CPC 86213, CPC 86219, CPC 86220

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Revisorloven (The Danish Act on Approved Auditors and Audit
Firms), Act No. 468 of 17 June 2008

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency is required in order to provide auditing services.
In order to enter into partnership with Danish authorised
accountants, foreign accountants must obtain permission from
the Danish Commerce and Enterprises Agency.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act no. 433 of 9 June 2004 on veterinary surgeons

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access is restricted to natural persons.

1044

1045

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services (on a fee or a contract basis)

Industry Classification:

CPC 822

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lov om omsætning af fast ejendom (The Act on the sale of real
estate)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For the provision of real estate services by a physical person
present in the territory of Denmark, only authorised real estate
agents who are natural persons that have been admitted to the
real estate agent register may use the title of “real estate agent”,
in accordance with. Section 25(2) of the Act on the sale of real
estate which lays down the requirements for admission to the
register. The Act requires that the applicant be a Danish resident
or a resident of the EU, EEA or the Swiss Confederation. The
residence requirement may be waived by the Danish Commerce
and Companies Agency.
The Act on the sale of real estate is only applicable when
providing real estate services to Danish consumers.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Translation and interpretation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87905

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lov om translatører og tolke (Act on Authorised Translators and
Interpreters), Act no. 181 of 25 March 1988, ss. 1 and 1a

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For the provision of authorised translation and interpretation
services by a physical person present in the territory of Denmark,
an authorisation from the Danish Commerce and Enterprises
1046

Agency is required.
Exemptions from the authorisation requirement for occasional
and temporary supply of these services may be granted to
persons who are established in an equivalent profession to that of
state authorised translator and interpreter in another Member
State of the EU, in an EEA country or in the Swiss
Confederation.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lov om vagtvirksomhed LBK nr 227 af 03/03/2010

Description:

Investment
Requirement of residence for members of the board.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Apotekerloven (Danish Pharmacy Act) LBK nr. 855 of
04/08/2008

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only natural persons are permitted to provide retail services of
pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the public.

1047

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.10502, CPC 5133, CPC5223, CPC
721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lov om Dansk Internationalt Skibsregister (Danish International
Ship Register Act), para 1 (2)
Søloven (Danish Merchant Shipping Act), para 1 (2).
Lov om Havne (Harbour Act), ss. 9 (6-7) and 10 (4-5)

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Non-EU residents cannot own Danish flagged vessels except:
(a) Through an enterprise incorporated in Denmark i.e. an
agency, a branch or a subsidiary. Furthermore, the vessels must
be effectively managed, controlled and operated from the
enterprise either through a national of a Member State of the EU
or the EEA or a person having Danish residence; or
(b) Through the establishment of a subsidiary company in
another Member State of the EU or the EEA and the transfer of
the ownership of the ship to this EU or EEA company. This EU
or EEA company is not required to establish an agency, branch
or subsidiary undertaking, but a representative in Denmark must
be appointed and the ship must be effectively managed,
controlled and directed from Denmark

Sector:

Fishing

1048

Transport
Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 741, CPC 742, CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lov om Dansk Internationalt Skibsregister (Danish International
Ship Register Act), para 1 (2)
Søloven (Danish Merchant Shipping Act), para 1 (2).
Lov om Havne (Harbours Act), ss. 9 (6-7) and 10 (4-5)

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

When a foreign private port operator performs ship stevedoring
services and other ship-related services at a Danish port in
collaboration with a Danish municipal port, permission from the
Minister of Transport is required according to the Harbours Act.
Municipal ports need permission from the Minister of Transport
in order to perform ship stevedoring services and other shiprelated services such as pilotage, towage etc. State ports are
prohibited from performing these services.
The Harbours Act does not place restrictions on private port
operators, thus foreign private port operators are not prohibited
from performing ship stevedoring services and other ship-related
services at Danish ports. However, foreign state and municipal
port operators are subject to the restrictions of the Harbours Act.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Pipeline transportation of fuels

Industry Classification:

CPC 7131

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Bekendtgørelse nr. 724 af 1. juli 2008 om indretning, etablering
og drift af olietanke, rørsysrtemer og pipelines (Order on the
arrangement, establishment and operation of oil tanks, piping
1049

systems and pipelines), no. 724 of 1 July 2008
Description:

Investment
The owner or user intending to establish a pipeline for the
transport of crude or refined petroleum and petroleum products
and of natural gas must obtain a permit from the local authority
before commencing work. The number of such permits which
are issued may be limited.
***

1050

Reservations applicable in Estonia
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Äriseadustik (Commercial Code) § 631 (2), § 385 (1)

Description:

Investment
A foreign company shall appoint a director or directors for a
branch. A director of a branch must be a natural person with
active legal capacity. The residence of at least one director of a
branch must be in Estonia, in a Member State of the EEA or in
the Swiss Confederation.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Advokatuuriseadus (Bar Association Act), RT I 2001, 36, 201
Notariaadiseadus (Notaries Act), RT I 2000, 104, 684
Kohtutäituri seadus (Bailiffs Act), RT I 2009, 68, 463

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Estonian law, including representation
before courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in
order to obtain full admission to the Bar.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
1051

be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
For legal services other than advisory services to clients related
to their legal rights and obligations and providing information on
legal matters, commercial presence is restricted to sole
proprietorships or to law firms with limited liability, in which
cases permission is needed from the Bar Association
(Advokatuur).

Sector:

Legal services

Sub-Sector:

Patent agents
Sworn translators

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Patendivoliniku seadus (Patent Agents Act) § 14 (1)
Vandetõlgi seadus (Sworn Translators Act) § 3 (2)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A patent agent must be a national of a Member State of the EU
with permanent residence in Estonia.
A sworn translator must be a national of a Member State of the
EU.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Ravimiseadus (Medicinal Products Act), RT I 2005, 2, 4; § 25
(3), §30, § 421
1052

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The retail of pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the
public may only be carried out through a pharmacy.
Mail order sale of medicinal products as well as delivery by post
or express service of medicinal products ordered through the
Internet is prohibited.
Establishment authorisation is subject to an economic needs test.
Main criteria: density conditions in the area.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing,
transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223, CPC
721, CPC 74520
CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

National
Law of Ship Flag and Ship Registers Act

Measures:
Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
The right to fly the national flag of the Republic of Estonia is
granted to seagoing vessels owned by Estonian citizens;
seagoing vessels in common ownership if the greater share of the
vessel is owned by Estonian co-owners. Majority ownership of a
vessel flying the Estonian flag is reserved to nationals and legal
persons from Member States of the EU provided that the person

1053

from another Member State of the EU has:
(a) a residence or a permanent business establishment in Estonia,
and the ship itself is not deemed to be a business establishment;
or
(b) a permanent representative whose residence or seat is in
Estonia and who is responsible for compliance with the
technical, social and administrative requirements established
with regard to seagoing vessels in Estonia and who directly
controls and monitors the use of the ship.
***

1054

Reservations applicable in Finland
For the purposes of the reservations of the EU and its Member States, a regional level of
government in Finland means the Åland Islands
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Laki elinkeinon harjoittamisen oikeudesta (Act on the Right to
Carry on a Trade) (122/1919), s. 1
Osuuskuntalaki (Co-Operatives Act) 1488/2001
Osakeyhtiölaki (Limited Liabilities Company Act) (624/2006),
Laki luottolaitostoiminnasta (Act on Credit Institutions)
(121/2007)

Description:

Investment
At least one of the partners in a general partnership or of general
partners in a limited partnership needs to have residency in the
EEA or, if the partner is a juridical person, be domiciled (no
branches allowed) in the EEA. Exemptions may be granted by
the registration authority.
To carry on trade as a private entrepreneur, residency in the EEA
is required.
If a foreign organisation from a country outside the EEA intends
to carry on a business or trade by establishing a branch in
Finland, a trade permit is required.
Residency in the EEA is required for at least one of the ordinary
and one of the deputy members of the Board of Directors and for
the Managing Director. Company exemptions may be granted by
the registration authority.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Mining

1055

Services incidental to mining
Engineering related scientific and technical consulting services
Ore mining
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 120, CPC 5115, CPC 883, CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Kaivoslaki (Mining Act) (621/2011)
Ydinenergialaki (Nuclear Energy Act) (990/1987)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The exploration for and exploitation of mineral resources are
subject to a licensing requirement, which is granted by the
Government in relation to the mining of nuclear material. A
permit of redemption for a mining area is required from the
Government. Permission may be granted to a natural person
resident in the EEA or a juridical person established in the EEA.
An economic needs test may apply.

Sector:

Animal husbandry

Sub-Sector:

Reindeer husbandry

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 014

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Poronhoitolaki (Reindeer Husbandry Act) (848/1990), Chapter 1,
s. 4
Protocol 3 to the Accession Treaty of Finland

Description:

Investment
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA resident in the
reindeer herding area may own reindeer and practice reindeer
husbandry. Exclusive rights may be granted.

1056

Sector:

Legal services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Tavaramerkkilaki (Trademarks Act) (7/1964)
Laki patenttiasiamiehistä (Patent Agent Act) (552/1967)
Laki kasvinjalostajanoikeudesta (Plant Breeder’s Right Act)
1279/2009
Mallioikeuslaki (Registered Designs Act) 221/1971

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A patent agent must be resident in the EEA in order to be recorded
in the Patent Agents Register, which is necessary for the practice
of the profession.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Laki asianajajista (Advocates Act) (496/1958), ss. 1 and 3,
Oikeudenkäymiskaari (4/1734) (Code of Judicial Procedure)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For admission to the Bar, which is required for the use of the
Finnish title “asianajaja”, EEA residency is required. Legal
services, including domestic law, may also be provided by nonBar members.

1057

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Tilintarkastuslaki (Auditing Act) (459/2007)
Sectoral laws requiring the use of locally-licensed auditors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
EEA residency required for at least one of the auditors of a
Finnish Limited Liability company and of companies which are
under the obligation to carry out an audit.
An auditor must be a locally-licensed auditor or a locallylicensed audit firm.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Translation services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 87905

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Laki auktorisoiduista kääntäjistä (Act on Authorised Translators)
(1231/2007), s. 2(1))

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency in EEA is required for certified translators.

Sector:
Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

Other services
Funeral, cremation and undertaking services
Part of CPC 9703

1058

Type of Reservation:
Level of Government:
Measures:
Description:

Market access
National
Hautaustoimilaki (Act on Burial Service) (457/2003)
Investment
Cremation services and operation/maintenance of cemeteries and
graveyards can only be performed by the state, municipalities,
parishes, religious communities or non-profit foundations or
societies.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Merilaki (Maritime Act) 674/1994

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Foreign investors must have their principal office in Finland in
order to register a vessel on the national shipping register.
A ship can be considered Finnish and has the right to fly the
Finnish flag only where a Finnish national or company owns
more than sixty per cent of the vessel.

1059

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Merilaki (Maritime Act) (674/1994)
Laki elinkeinon harjoittamisen oikeudesta (Act on the Right to
Carry on a Trade) (122/1919), s. 4

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Supporting services for maritime transport when provided in
Finnish maritime waters or internal waterways are reserved to
fleets operating under the national, EU or Norwegian flag.
***

1060

Reservations applicable in France
Sector:

Agriculture and hunting

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 011, ISIC rev 3.1 012, ISIC rev 3.1 013, ISIC rev
3.1 014, ISIC rev 3.1 015

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code rural et de la pêche maritime: art. R331-1 on installation
and art. L. 529-2 on agricultural co-operatives

Description:

Investment
The establishment of farms and agricultural co-operatives by
non-EU investors is subject to authorisation. Prior authorisation
is required in order to become a member or act as a director of an
agricultural co-operative.

Sector:

Fishing

Sub-Sector:

Fishing and aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 050, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code rural et de la pêche maritime: art. L921-3

Description:

Investment
A French vessel flying the French flag may be issued a fishing
authorisation or may be allowed to fish on the basis of national
quotas only when a real economic link on the territory of the
France is established and the vessel is directed and controlled
from a permanent establishment located on the territory of
France.

1061

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Loi du 31 décembre 1971, art. 56
Loi 90-1258 relative à l’exercice sous forme de société des
professions libérales
Loi 90- 1259 du 31 décembre 1990, art. 7

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of French law, including representation before
courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in order to
obtain full admission to the Bar. Only nationals of a Member
State of the EEA or ofthe Swiss Confederation may be admitted
to the Bar, and are thus entitled to provide legal services in
respect of French law.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
Respresentation before the "Cour de Cassation” and “Conseil
d’Etat" is subject to quotas. In a law firm providing services in
respect of French or EU law, at least 75 per cent of the partners
holding 75 per cent of the shares shall be lawyers fully admitted
to the Bar in France.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and bookkeeping services
Auditing services
Taxation advisory services

1062

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, CPC 86213, CPC 86219, CPC 86220,
CPC 863

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Ordonnance 45-2138 du 19 septembre 1945, arts. 3, 7, 26,27

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Provision of accounting and bookkeeping services by a foreign
service supplier is conditional on a decision of the Minister of
Economics, Finance and Industry, in agreement with the
Minister of Foreign Affairs.
For accounting and bookkeeping services: provision through
SEL (anonyme, à responsabilité limitée ou en commandite par
actions), AGC (Association de gestion et comptabilité) or SCP
(Société civile professionnelle) only. For taxation advisory
services, provision through SEL (anonyme, à responsabilité
limitée ou en commandite par actions) or SCP (Société civile
professionnelle) only.
For statutory audits: provision through any company form except
SNC (Société en nom collectif), SCS (Société en commandite
simple).

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Loi 90-1258 relative à l’exercice sous forme de société des
professions libérales.
Décret 95-129 du 2 février 1995 relatif à l'exercice en commun de
la profession d'architecte sous forme de société en participation.
Décret 92-619 du 6 juillet 1992 relatif à l'exercice en commun de
la profession d'architecte sous forme de société d'exercice libéral à
responsabilité limitée SELARL, société d'exercice libéral à forme
anonyme SELAFA, société d'exercice libéral en commandite par

1063

actions SELCA.
Loi 77-2 du 3 janvier 1977, arts. 12, 13, 14
Description:

Investment
An architect may only establish in France in order to provide
architectural services using one of the following legal forms (on
a non-discriminatory basis):SA et SARL (sociétés anonymes, à responsabilité limitée),
EURL (Entreprise unipersonnelle à responsabilité limitée), SCP
(en commandite par actions), SCOP (Société coopérative et
participative), SELARL (société d'exercice libéral à responsabilité
limitée), SELAFA (société d'exercice libéral à forme anonyme),
SELAS (société d'exercice libéral )or SAS (Société par actions
simplifiée), or as individual or as a partner in an architectural
firm.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code rural et de la pêche maritime arts. L241-1; L241-2; L241-21

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality condition limited to nationals of a Member State of
the EU and the EEA. Insofar as Canada allows French citizens to
provide veterinary services then France will allow Canadian
service suppliers to provide veterinary services under the same
conditions.
The legal forms available to a company providing veterinary
services are limited to three types of companies (SEP (Société en
participation); SCP (Société civile professionnelle); and SEL
(Société d'exercice liberal).

1064

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Related scientific and technical consulting services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Loi 90-1258 relative à l’exercice sous forme de société des
professions libérales, modifiée par les lois 2001-1168 du 12
décembre 2001 et 2008-776 du 4 août 2008

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For surveying, access through a SEL (anonyme, à responsabilité
limitée ou en commandite par actions), SCP (Société civile
professionnelle), SA and SARL (sociétés anonymes, à
responsabilité limitée) only.
Foreign investors are required to have a specific authorisation for
exploration and prospecting services.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail

Industry Classification:

CPC 631, CPC 632

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Art. L752-1 à L752-6 du code de commerce

Description:

Investment
The authorisation for large department stores is subject to an
Economic Needs Test.
Main criteria: number of and impact on existing stores,
population density, geographic spread, impact on traffic
conditions and creation of new employment.

1065

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Distribution of tobacco

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 6222, part of CPC 6310

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code général des impôts, art. 568 et articles 276-279 de l’annexe
2 de ce code

Description:

Investment
State monopoly on wholesale and retail sales of tobacco.
Nationality condition for tobacconists (buraliste).

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:

National
Code de la santé publique, arts. L4221-1, L4221-13, L5125-10
Loi 90-1258 relative à l’exercice sous forme de société des
professions libérales, modifiée par les lois 2001-1168 du 12
décembre 2001 et 2008-776 du 4 août 2008 (Law 90-1258 on the
exercise of liberal professions in the form of a company )

Description:

Investment
EEA or Swiss nationality is required in order to operate a
pharmacy.
Foreign pharmacists may be permitted to establish within
annually established quotas.
Commercial presence must take one of the legal forms which are
allowed under national law on a non-discriminatory basis:

1066

anonyme, à responsabilité limitée ou en commandite par actions
(SEL), société en noms collectifs (SNC), société de
participations financières de profession libérale de pharmaciens
d'officine and SARL only

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Privately funded primary, secondary, and higher education
services

Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code de l’éducation, Arts. L 444-5, L 914-4, L 441-8, L 731-8, L
731-1 to 8

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required in order to
teach in a privately funded educational institution.
However, nationals of Canada may obtain an authorisation from
the relevant competent authorities in order to teach in primary,
secondary and higher level educational institutions.
Nationals of Canada may also obtain an authorisation from the
relevant competent authorities in order to establish and operate
or manage primary, secondary or higher level educational
institutions. Such authorisation is granted on a discretionary
basis.

Sector:

Health and social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 931, CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

1067

Measures:

Loi 90-1258 relative à l’exercice sous forme de société des
professions libérals, modifiée par les lois 2001-1168 du 12
décembre 2001 et 2008-776 du 4 août 2008 et la loi 66-879 du
29 novembre 1966 (SCP)
Code de la santé publique, art. L6122-1,
2 (Ordonnance2010-177 du 23 février 2010)

Description:

L6122-

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
While other types of legal form are available for EU investors,
foreign investors only have access to the legal forms of "société
d'exercice liberal" and "société civile professionnelle".
For medical, dental and midwives services, French nationality is
required. However, access by foreigners is possible within
annually established quotas.
For medical, dental and midwives services and services by
nurses, provision through anonyme, à responsabilité limitée ou
en commandite par actions (SEL) or SCP only.
For hospital and ambulance services, residential health facilities
(other than hospital services) and social services, an
authorisation is necessary in order to exercise management
functions. The authorisation process takes into account the
availability of local managers.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1068

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code des douanes, Art. 219

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Foreign investors that are not nationals of a Member State of the
EU or not incorporated or having their principal office in the EU
or the EEA, cannot own 50 per cent or more of a French flag
seagoing vessel.
The above reservation does not apply to ships that would satisfy
the French flag ownership requirements after the exercise of a
lease-option. It also does not apply to a ship that is bareboat
chartered to a charterer that would satisfy the ownership
requirements and is actually making use of the ship.
***

1069

Reservations applicable in Germany
Sector:

Manufacturing

Sub-Sector:

Newspapers, journals and periodicals, appearing at least four
times a week and newspapers, journals and periodicals,
appearing less than four times a week

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 323, ISIC rev 3.1 324

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National – Regional (sub-federal)

Measures:

§ 10 Abs. 1 Nr. 4 Landesmediengesetz (LMG) Rheinland-Pfalz
v. 4. Februar 2005, GVBl. S. 23 in der Fassung vom 20.
Dezember 2011, GVBl. S. 427
§ 9 Abs. 1 Nr. 1 Gesetz über die Presse Baden-Württemberg
(LPG BW) v. 14 Jan. 1964, GBl. S.11, geändert durch Gesetz v.
17. Dez. 2009, GBl. S. 809
§ 9 Abs. 1 Nr. 1 Pressegesetz für das Land Nordrhein-Westfalen
(Landespressegesetz NRW) v. 24. Mai 1966 (GV. NRW. S.
340), zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 7 des Gesetzes vom 18.
November 2008 (GV. NRW. S. 706)
§ 8 Abs. 1 Gesetz über die Presse Schleswig-Holstein (PressG
SH) vom 25.1.2012, GVOBL. SH S. 266
§ 7 Abs. 2 Landespressegesetz für das Land MecklenburgVorpommern (LPrG M-V) v. 6 Juni 1993, GVOBl. M-V 1993,
S. 541
§ 8 Abs. 1 Nr. 1 Pressegesetz für das Land Sachsen-Anhalt in der
Neufassung vom 2.5.2013 (GVBl. LSA S. 198)
§ 7 Abs. 2 Berliner Pressegesetz (BlnPrG) v. 15 Juni 1965,
GVBl. S. 744 zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz v. 18. Nov. 2009,
GVBl. S. 674
§ 10 Abs. 1 Nr. 1 Brandenburgisches Landspressegesetz
(BbgPG) v. 13. Mai 1993, GVBl. I/93, S. 162, zuletzt geändert
durch Gesetz v. 21. Juni 2012, GVBl. I/12, S. 1
§ 9 Abs. 1 Nr.1 Gesetz über die Presse Bremen (BrPrG), Brem.
GBl. 1965, S. 63; zuletzt geändert durch Nr. 2.1 i.V.m. Anl.1
ÄndBek vom 24.1.2012 (Brem.GBl. S.24)
§ 7 Abs. 3 Nr. 1 Hessisches Pressegesetz (HPresseG) v. 12.
Dezember 2004, GVBl. 2004 I S.2, zuletzt geändert durch
Gesetz vom 13. Dezember 2012, GVBl. S. 622
§ 7 Abs. 2 i.V.m § 9 Abs.1 Ziffer 1 Thüringer Pressegesetz
1070

(TPG) v. 31. Juli 1991, GVBl. 1991 S. 271 in der Fassung v. 16.
Juli 2008, GvBl. S. 243
§ 9 Abs. 1 Nr. 1Hamburgisches Pressegesetz v. 29. Januar 1965,
HmbGVBl., S. 15, in der Fassung v. 15. Dez. 2009, HmbGVBl.
S. 444, 447
§ 6 Abs. 2 Sächsisches Gesetz über die Presse (SächsPresseG) v.
3. April 1992, SächsGVBl. S. 125 zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz
v. 13. August 2009, SächsGVBl. S. 438
§ 8 Abs. 2 Niedersächsisches Pressegesetz v. 22. März 1965,
GVbl. S.9 zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 2 des Gesetzes vom
11.10.2010 (Nds. GVBl. S. 480)
§ 9 Abs. 1 Nr. 1 Saarländisches Mediengesetz (SMG) vom 27.
Februar 2002 (Amtsbl. S. 498), zuletzt geändert durch Art. 1
ÄndG vom 22. 4. 2013 (Amtsbl. I S. 111)
Art. 5 Abs. 2 Bayerisches Pressegesetz in der Fassung der
Bekanntmachung v. 19. April 2000 (GVBl, S. 340), zuletzt
geändert durch Gesetz v. 22.12.2009 (GVBl. S. 630)
Description:

Investment
Each publicly distributed or printed newspaper, journal, or
periodical must clearly indicate a "responsible editor" (the full
name and address of a natural person).
The responsible editor may be required to be a permanent
resident of Germany, the EU or an EEA country. Exceptions
may be allowed by the Federal Minister of the Interior.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

§ 59e, § 59f, § 206 Bundesrechtsanwaltsordnung (BRAO;
Federal Lawyers Act)
Gesetz über die Tätigkeit europäischer Rechtsanwälte in
Deutschland (EuRAG)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
1071

services in respect of German law, including representation
before courts. Only EEA or Swiss lawyers may be admitted to
the Bar, and are thus entitled to provide legal services in respect
of German law (EuRAG).
Residency (commercial presence) is required in order to obtain
full admission to the Bar.
According to the Lawyers Act (§§ 59e, 59f BRAO), only
German lawyers, EEA lawyers, EU lawyers or lawyers of the
Swiss Confederation are allowed to provide legal services
through commercial presence, in the form of a Anwalts-GmbH
or Anwalt-AG. Lawyers from other countries (§ 206 BRAO)
may have their commercial presence in the form of AnwaltsGmbH or Anwalt-AG by acquiring minority shares only.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services: patent lawyers

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

§ 52e, § 52 f, § 154a und § 154 b Patentanwaltsordnung (PAO)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Third country patent lawyers (non-EU, EEA Member States or
the Swiss Confederation) are not allowed to act as patent lawyers
(§ 154a PAO) in Germany.
According to the Patentanwaltsordnung (§§ 52e, 52f PAO), only
German patent lawyers, EEA patent lawyers, EU patent lawyers
or patent lawyers of the Swiss Confederation are allowed to
provide legal services through commercial presence, in the form
of a Patentanwalts-GmbH or Patentanwalt-AG. Patent Lawyers
from other countries (§ 154a PAO) may have their commercial
presence in the form of Patentanwalts-GmbH or PatentanwaltAG by acquiring minority shares only.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting services

1072

Auditing services
Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 (other than accounting services),
CPC 86213, CPC 86219, CPC 86220)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Handelsgesetzbuch, HGB, (Code of Commercial Law)
Wirtschaftsprüferordnung, WPO, (Public Accountant Act)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Auditing companies (“Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaften”) may
only adopt certain German legal forms. Incorporated companies,
associations limited by shares, limited liability companies,
general partnerships, limited commercial partnerships, other
partnerships and European companies (SE) may be recognised as
“Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaften”. General partnerships and
limited commercial partnerships may be recognised as
“Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaften” if they are listed as trading
partnerships in the commercial register on the basis of their
fiduciary activities, art. 27 WPO. The entity “GmbH & Co.
Kommanditgesellschaft” may carry out accounting and auditing
services.
Establishment in the EU is required in order to provide auditing
services. However, auditors from Canada registered in
accordance with art. 134 WPO may carry out the statutory audit
of annual financial statements or provide the consolidated
financial statements of a company with its headquarters outside
the EU, whose transferable securities are offered for trading in a
regulated market.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Medical and dental services
Midwives services
Services provided by nurses

Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, CPC 93191

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
1073

Level of Government:

National – Regional (sub-federal)

Measures:

Bundesärzteordnung (Federal Medical Regulation)
Gesetz über die Ausübung der Zahnheilkunde,
Gesetz über die Berufe des Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten
und des Kinder- und Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten (Act on the
Provision of Psychotherapy Services of 16.07.1998)
Gesetz über die berufsmäßige Ausübung der Heilkunde ohne
Bestallung
Gesetz über den Beruf der Hebamme und des
Entbindungspflegers
Gesetz über die Berufe in der Krankenpflege
§ 7 Absatz 3 Musterberufordnung fuer Aerzte (German Model
professional Code for doctors)
§95,§ 99 and seq. SGB V (Book on Social Security No. V),
Statutory Health Insurance
§ 1 Absatz 2 and Absatz 5 Hebammengesetz (Midwife Code),
§ 291b SGB V (Book on Social Security No. V) on E-health
providers
Heilberufekammergesetz des Landes Baden-Württemberg in der
Fassung vom 16. 03. 1995 (GBl. BW of 17.05.1995 S. 314),
zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 2 des Gesetzes zur Änderung des
Landespflegegesetzes und anderer berufsrechtlicher Vorschriften
vom 15.06.2010 (GBl. BW of 22.06.2010, pages 427, 431)
Gesetz über die Berufsausübung, die Berufsvertretungen und die
Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte, Apotheker
sowie der Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten und der Kinderund Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten (Heilberufe-Kammergesetz
- HKaG) in Bayern vom 06.02.2002 (BAY GVBl 2002, page 42)
Gesetz über die Kammern und die Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der
Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Apotheker, Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten und Kinder- und Jugendpsychotherapeuten (Berliner
Kammergesetz) vom 04.09.1978 (Berliner GVBl. page 1937,
rev. page 1980), zuletzt geändert durch Artikel I Elftes
Änderungsgesetz vom 17.03.2010 (Berliner GVBl. page 135)
§ 31 Heilberufsgesetz Brandenburg (HeilBerG) vom 28.04.2003,
zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 2 des Gesetzes vom 11.06.2008
(GVBl. I page 134, 139)
Bremisches
Gesetz
über
die
Berufsvertretung,
die
Berufsausübung,
die
Weiterbildung
und
die
Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Psychotherapeuten,
Tierärzte und Apotheker (Heilberufsgesetz - HeilBerG) vom
12.05.2005, zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 2 Gesetz zur
1074

Umsetzung der EU-Dienstleistungsrichtlinie im Land Bremen
und Novellierung weiterer Rechtsnormen vom 24.11.2009
(Brem.GBl. page 535)
§ 29 Heilberufsgesetz (HeilBG NRW) of 09.05.2000 in der
Fassung vom 17.12.2009 (GV. NRW 2009, page 865),
§ 20 Heilberufsgesetz (HeilBG Rheinland-Pfalz) of 07.02.2003
in der Fassung vom 15.09.2011 (GV. R-Pf 2011, page 425)
Gesetz über Berufsausübung, Berufsvertretungen und
Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte, Apotheker
sowie der Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten und der Kinder
und Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten im Freistaat (Sächsisches
Heilberufekammergesetz – SächsHKaG) vom 24.05.1994
(SächsGVBl. page 935), zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 2 Absatz
5 des Gesetzes vom 19.05.2010 (SächsGVBl. pages 142 and
143),
Gesetz
über
die
öffentliche
Berufsvertretung,
die
Berufspflichten, die Weiterbildung und die Berufsgerichtsbarkeit
der
Ärzte/
Ärztinnen,
Zahnärzte/
Zahnärztinnen,
psychologischen Psychotherapeuten/ Psychotherapeutinnen und
Kinderund
Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten/psychotherapeutinnen,
Tierärzte/Tierärztinnen und Apotheker/Apothekerinnen im
Saarland (Saarländisches Heilberufekammergesetz - SHKG)
vom 19.11.2007, zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 19.11.2008
(ABl. page 1930)
Thüringer Heilberufegesetz vom 29. Januar 2002 (GVBl 2002,
125) zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 14 des Gesetzes vom 8. Juli
2009 (GVBl 2009, 592)
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Geographical restrictions may be imposed on professional
registration, which apply to nationals and non-nationals alike.
Doctors (including psychologists, psychotherapists, and dentists)
need to register with the regional associations of statutory health
insurance physicians or dentists (kassenärztliche or zahnärztliche
Vereinigungen), if they wish to treat patients insured by the
statutory sickness funds. This registration can be subject to
quantitative restrictions based on the regional distribution of
doctors. For dentists this restriction does not apply. Registration
is necessary only for doctors participating in the public health
scheme. Non-discriminatory restrictions on the legal form of
establishment required to provide these services may exist (§ 95
SGB V).
For medical, dental and midwives services, access is restricted to

1075

natural persons only.
Establishment requirements may apply.
Telemedicine may only be provided in the context of a primary
treatment involving the prior physical presence of a doctor.
The number of ICT (information and communications
technology) -service suppliers may be limited to guarantee
interoperability, compatibility and necessary safety standards.
This is applied in a non-discriminatory way.

Sector:

Health and social services

Sub-Sector:

Human health and social care services
Hospitals
Ambulance services
Rescue services

Industry Classification:

CPC 931, CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National – Regional (sub-federal)

Measures:

Bundesärzteordnung (Federal Medical Regulation)
Gesetz über die Ausübung der Zahnheilkunde
Gesetz über die Berufe des Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten
und des Kinder- und Jugendlichentherapeuten (Act on the
Provision of Psychotherapy Services of 16.07.1998)
Gesetz über die berufsmäßige Ausübung der Heilkunde ohne
Bestallung
Gesetz über den Beruf der Hebamme und des
Entbindungspflegers
Gesetz über den Beruf der Rettungsassistentin und des
Rettungsassistenten
Gesetz über die Berufe in der Krankenpflege
Gesetz über die Berufe in der Physiotherapie
Gesetz über den Beruf des Logopäden
Gesetz über den Beruf des Orthoptisten und der Orthoptistin
Gesetz über den Beruf der Podologin und des Podologen

1076

Gesetz über den Beruf der Diätassitentin und des Diätassistenten
Gesetz über den Beruf der Ergotherapeutin und des
Ergotherapeuten
Bundesapothekerorndung
gesetz über den Beruf des pharmazeutisch-technischen
Assistenten
Gesetz über technische Assistenten in der
Medizin,Personenbeförderungsgesetz (Act on Public Transport)
Gesetz über den Rettungsdienst (Rettungsdienstgesetz - RDG) in
Baden-Württember vom 08.02.2010 (GBl. 2010, page 285)
Bayerisches Rettungsdienstgesetz (BayRDG) vom 22.07.2008
(GVBl 2008, page 429)
Gesetz über den Rettungsdienst für das Land Berlin
(Rettungsdienstgesetz) vom 08.07.1993 (GVBl. page 313)
geändert durch Anlage Nr. 33 des 7. Aufhebungsgesetzes vom
04.03.2005 (GVBl. page 125)
Gesetz über den Rettungsdienst im Land Brandenburg
(BbgRettG) in der Fassung vom 18.05.2005,
Gesetz über den Rettungsdienst im Lande Bremen
(BremRettDG) vom 22.09.1992, zuletzt geändert durch das
Gesetz vom 26.05.1998
Hamburgisches Rettungsdienstgesetz (HmbRDG) vom
09.06.1992, zuletzt geändert am 27.09.1995
Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Rettungsdienstes in Hessen (HRDG)
vom 24.11.1998
Gesetz über den Rettungsdienst für das Land MecklenburgVorpommern (RDGM-V) vom 01.07.1993, geändert durch
Erstes Gesetz zur Änderung des RDGM-V vom 29.05.1998,
Niedersächsisches Rettungsdienstgesetz (NRettDG) vom
02.10.2007 (GVBl, page 473, zuletzt geändert am 22.02.2012
(GVBl. Page 18)
Gesetz über den Rettungsdienst sowie die Notfallrettung und den
Krankentransport durch Unternehmer (RettG NRW) vom
09.11.1992, zuletzt geändert am 06.07.2004.
Landesgesetz über den Rettungsdienst sowie den Notfall- und
Krankentransport (RettDG) vom 22.04.1991.
Saarländisches Rettungsdienstgesetz (SRettG) vom 09.02.1994,
zuletzt geändert am 27.11.1996.
Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Brandschutzes, Rettungsdienstes
und Katastrophenschutzes im Freistaat Sachsen vom 24.06.2004.

1077

Rettungsdienstgesetz des Landes Sachsen-Anhalt (RettDG LSA)
vom 07.11.1993.
Gesetz über die Notfallrettung und den Krankentransport im
Land Schleswig-Holstein (RDG) vom 29.11.1991.
Thüringer Rettungsdienstgesetz (ThüRettG) vom 22.12.1992.
§ 8 Krankenhausfinanzierungsgesetz (Hospital Financing Act)
§§ 14, 30 Gewerbeordnung (German Trade, Commerce and
Industry Regulation Act)
§ 108 Sozialgesetzbuch V (Book on Social Security No. V),
Statutory Health Insurance
§ 291b SGB V (Book on Social Security No. V) E-health
provider
§ 15 Sozialgesetzbuch VI (SGB VI, Book on Social Security No.
VI)
§ 34 Sozialgesetzbuch VII (SGB VII, Book on Social Security
No. VII), Unfallversicherung
§ 21 Sozialgesetzbuch IX (SGB IX, Book on Social Security No.
IX) Rehabilitation und Teilhabe behinderter Menschen)
§ 72 Sozialgesetzbuch XI (SGB XI, Book on Social Security No.
XI), Long-term Care Insurance
Landespflegegesetze
Gesetz zur Umsetzung der Pflegeversicherung in BadenWürttemberg (Landespflegegesetz - LPflG) vom 11. September
1995, zuletzt geändert sowie Abschnitt 7 neu gefasst durch Artikel 1 des Gesetzes vom 15. Juni 2010 (GBl. S. 427)
Gesetz zur Ausführung der Sozialgesetze (AGSG) vom 8.
Dezember 2006, zuletzt geändert durch § 3 des Gesetzes vom 20.
Dezember 2011 (GVBl. S. 689)
Gesetz zur Planung und Finanzierung von Pflegeeinrichtungen
(Landespflegeeinrichtungsgesetz - LPflegEG) vom 19. Juli 2002,
zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 19. Dezember2005 (GVBl. S.
792)
Gesetz zur Umsetzung des Elften Buches Sozialgesetzbuch
(Landespflegegesetz - LPflegeG) Vom 29. Juni 2004, zuletzt
geändert durch Artikel 1 des Gesetzes vom 12. Juli 2011 (GVBl.
I S. 15)
Gesetz zur Ausführung des Pflege-Versicherungsgesetzes im
Lande Bremen und zur Änderung des Bremischen Ausführungsgesetzes zum Bundessozialhilfegesetz (BremAGPflegeVG) vom
26. März 1996, zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 28. Februar

1078

2012 (GBl. S. 149)
Hamburgisches Landespflegegesetz (HmbLPG) vom 18. September 2007, zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 22. Juni 2010
(GVBl. S. 440)
Hessisches Ausführungsgesetz zum Pflege-Versicherungsgesetz
vom 19. Dezember 1994, zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 30.
April 1997 (GVBl. I S. 74)
Landespflegegesetz (LPflegeG M-V) vom 16. Dezember 2003,
zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 3 des Gesetzes vom 29. September
2010 (GVBl. S. 534)
Gesetz zur Planung und Förderung von Pflegeeinrichtungen nach
dem Elften Buch Sozialgesetzbuch (Niedersächsisches
Pflegegesetz - NPflegeG) vom 26. Mai 2004, zuletzt geändert
durch Art.1 des Haushaltsbegleitgesetzes vom 17. Dezember
2010 (Nds.GVBl. S.631)
Gesetz zur Umsetzung des Pflege-Versicherungsgesetzes
(Landespflegegesetz Nordrhein-Westfalen - PfG NW) vom 19.
März 1996, zuletzt geändert durch Teil I Artikel 17 des Gesetzes
vom 3. Mai 2005 (GVBl. S. 498)
Landesgesetz zur Sicherstellung und Weiterentwicklung der
pflegerischen Angebotsstruktur (LPflegeASG) vom 25. Juli 2005
(GVBl 2005, S. 299) – (Rheinland-Pfalz)
Saarländisches Gesetz Nr. 1355 zur Planung und Förderung von
Pflegeeirich-tungen vom 21. Juni 1995, zuletzt geändert durch
Gesetzes vom 1. Juli 2009 (ABl. S. 1217)
Sächsisches Pflegegesetz (SächsPflegeG) vom 25. März 1996 ist
zum 31.12.2002 außer Kraft getreten)
Ausführungsgesetz zum Pflege-Versicherungsgesetz (PflegeVAG) vom 7. August 1996, zuletzt geändert durch Art. 1 des Gesetzes vom 10. August 2007 (GVBl. S. 306)
Ausführungsgesetz zum Pflege-Versicherungsgesetz (Landespflegegesetz - LPflegeG) vom 10. Februar 1996, zuletzt geändert durch Art. 63 LVO vom 15. September 2010 (GVOBl. S.
575)
Thüringer Gesetz zur Ausführung des Pflege-Versicherungsgesetzes (ThürAGPflegeVG) vom 20. Juli 2005, zuletzt geändert
durch Gesetz vom 8. Juni 2010 (GVBl. S. 206)
Personenbeförderungsgesetz (Act on Public Transport),
Landeskrankenhausgesetz Baden-Württemberg vom 29.11.2007,
geändert durch Universitätsmedizingesetz vom 07.02.2011
Bavarian Act on Hospitals (Bayerisches Krankenhausgesetzes BayKrG) vom 28.03.2007, geändert durch das
1079

Nachtragshaus¬halts¬gesetz 2008 vom 23.04.2008, ss. 2 and 3
§§ 12, 13, 14 Krankenhausentwicklungsgesetz Brandenburg
(BbgKHEG) vom 08.07.2009 (GVBl. I/09, page 310),
Berliner Gesetz zur Neuregelung des Krankenhausrechts vom
18.09.2011 (GVBl. page 483)
Bremisches Krankenhausgesetz (BrmKrHG) vom 12.04.2011
(Gesetzblatt Bremen vom 29.04.2011)
Hamburgisches Krankenhausgesetz (HmbKHG) vom 17.04.1991
(HmbGVBl. Page127), geändert durch zweites ÄndG vom
06.10.2006 (HmbGVBl. page 510)
§§ 17-19 Hessisches Krankenhausgesetz 2011 (HKHG 2011)
vom 21.12.2010 (GVBl. I 2010, Seite 587)
Krankenhausgesetz für das Land Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
(LKHG M-V) vom 20.05.2011 (GVOBl. M-V 2011, page 327),
Niedersächsisches Krankenhausgesetz (NKHG) vom 19.01.2012
(Nds. GVBl. Nr. 1 vom 26.01.2012, page 2)
Krankenhausgestaltungsgesetz des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen
(KHGG NRW) vom 11.12.2007 (GV. NRW page 702), geändert
am 16.03.2010 (GV. NRW page 184)
§ 6 Landeskrankenhausgesetz Rheinland-Pfalz (LKG Rh-Pf) in
der Fassung vom 01.12.2010 (GVBl. page 433)
Saarländisches Krankenhausgesetz (SKHG) vom 13.07.2005,
zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 18.11.2010 (Saarl. Amtsbl. I
page 1420)
Gesetz zur Ausführung des
Krankenhausfinan¬zierungs¬gesetzes (AG-KHG) in SchleswigHolstein vom 12.12.1986 (GVOBl. Schl.-H. page 302), zuletzt
geändert am 12.10.2005
§ 3 Krankenhausgesetz Sachsen-Anhalt (KHG LSA) vom
14.04.2005 (GVBl. LSA 2005, page 202)
Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Krankenhauswesens (Sächsisches
Krankenhausgesetz - SächsKHG) vom 19.08.1993 (Sächs GVBl.
page 675), zuletzt geändert durch Sächsisches Standortegesetz
vom 27.01.2012 (SächsGVBl. Seite 130)
§ 4 Thüringischer Krankenhausgesetz (Thür KHG) in der
Fassung der Neubekanntmachung 30.04.2003 (GVBl. page 262)
Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Krankenhauswesens (Sächsisches
Krankenhausgesetz – SächsKHG) vom 19. August 1993
(SächsGVBl. page 675), zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 50 des
Gesetzes vom 27. Januar 2012 (SächsGVBl. page 130, 147)

1080

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Rescue services and "qualified ambulance services" are
organised and regulated by the Länder. Most Länder delegate
competences in the field of rescue services to municipalities.
Municipalities are allowed to give priority to not-for-profit
operators. This applies equally to foreign as well as domestic
service suppliers. Ambulance services are subject to planning,
permission and accreditation.
Telemedicine may only be provided in the context of a primary
treatment involving the prior physical presence of a doctor.
The number of ICT (information and communications
technology)-service suppliers may be limited to guarantee
interoperability, compatibility and necessary safety standards.
This is applied in a non-discriminatory way.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National - Regional (sub-federal)

Measures:

Federal Code for the Veterinary Profession (BundesTierärzteordnung in der Fassung der Bekanntmachung vom 20.
November 1981 (BGBl. I S. 1193), die zuletzt durch Artikel 22
des Gesetzes vom 06.12.2011 (BGBl. I S. 2515) geändert
worden ist, § 4Abs. 2)
sub-central level:
Acts on the Councils for the Medical Profession of the Länder
(Heilberufs- und Kammergesetze der Länder) and (based on
these) Baden-Württemberg, Gesetz über das Berufsrecht und die
Kammern der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte Apotheker,
Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten sowie der Kinder- und
Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten (Heilberufe-Kammergesetz HBKG) in der Fassung vom 16.03.1995
Bayern, Gesetz über die Berufsausübung, die Berufsvertretungen
und die Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte,
Apotheker sowie der Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten und
der Kinder- und Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten (HeilberufeKammergesetz - HKaG) in der Fassung der Bekanntmachung

1081

vom 06.02.2002
Berlin, Gesetz über die Kammern und die Berufsgerichtsbarkeit
der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte, Apotheker, Psychologischen
Psychotherapeuten
und
Kinderund
Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten (Berliner Kammergesetz) in der
Fassung vom 04.091978 (GVBl. S. 1937), zuletzt geändert durch
Gesetz vom 17.03.2010 (GVBl. S. 135)
Brandenburg, Heilberufsgesetz (HeilBerG) Vom 28.04.2003
(GVBl.I/03, [Nr. 07], S.126), zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 18
des Gesetzes vom 13.03.2012 (GVBl.I/12, [Nr. 16]
Bremen, Gesetz über die Berufsvertretung, die Berufsausübung,
die Weiterbildung und die Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte,
Zahnärzte, Psychotherapeuten, Tierärzte und Apotheker
(Heilberufsgesetz - HeilBerG) vom 12.05.2005, (Brem.GBl. S.
149) Zuletzt geändert durch Nr. 2.1 i.V.m. Anl. 1 ÄndBek vom
24.01.2012 (Brem.GBl. S. 24)
Hamburg, Hamburgisches Kammergesetz für die Heilberufe
(HmbKGH) Vom 14.12.2005 Zum Ausgangs- oder
Titeldokument (HmbGVBl. 2005, S. 495) zuletzt geändert durch
Gesetz vom 02.03.2010 (HmbGVBl. S. 247)
Hessen,
Gesetz
über
die
Berufsvertretungen,
die
Berufsausübung,
die
Weiterbildung
und
die
Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte, Apotheker,
Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten und Kinder- und
Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten (Heilberufsgesetz) in der
Fassung vom 07.02.2003, zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 3 des
Gesetzes vom 14.05.2012 (GVBl. S. 126)
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Heilberufsgesetz (HeilBerG) Vom
22.01.1993 (GVOBl. M-V 1993, S. 62) zuletzt geändert durch
Artikel 3 des Gesetz zur Ergänzung und Änderung von
Gesundheitsrecht
und
zur
Änderung
des
Aufgabenzuordnungsgesetzes vom 06.07.2011
Niedersachsen, Kammergesetz für die Heilberufe
(HKG) in der Fassung vom 08.12.2000 zuletzt geändert durch
Gesetz vom 09.05.2012 (Nds. GVBl. S. 100)
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Heilberufsgesetz NRW (HeilBerg) vom 9.
Mai 2000 (GV. NRW. 2000 S. 403ff.) zuletzt geändert durch
Gesetz vom 17. Dezember 2009 (GV.NRW 2009 S. 865f)
Rheinland-Pfalz, Heilberufsgesetz (HeilBG) vom 20.10.1978,
zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 4 des Gesetzes vom 27.10.2009
(GVBl. S. 358)
Saarland, Gesetz Nr. 1405 über die öffentliche Berufsvertretung,
die
Berufspflichten,
die
Weiterbildung
und
die

1082

Berufsgerichtsbarkeit
der
Ärzte/Ärztinnen,
Zahnärzte/Zahnärztinnen,
Tierärzte/Tierärztinnen
und
Apotheker/Apothekerinnen im Saarland (Saarländisches
Heilberufekammergesetz - SHKG) vom 11.03.1998 in der
Fassung der Bekanntmachung vom 19.11.2007 (Amtsbl. S.
2190) geändert durch das Gesetz vom 19.11.2008 (Amtsbl. S.
1930)
Sachsen, Gesetz über Berufsausübung, Berufsvertretungen und
Berufsgerichtsbarkeit der Ärzte, Zahnärzte, Tierärzte, Apotheker
sowie der Psychologischen Psychotherapeuten und der Kinderund Jugendlichenpsychotherapeuten im Freistaat Sachsen
(Sächsisches Heilberufekammergesetz – SächsHKaG) vom
24.05.1994, Rechtsbereinigt mit Stand vom 5. Juni 2010
Sachsen-Anhalt, Gesetz über die Kammern für Heilberufe
Sachsen-Anhalt (KGHB-LSA) vom 13.07.1994 (GVBl. LSA
1994, S. 832) zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 4 des Gesetzes vom
02.02.2011 (GVBl. LSA S. 58)
Schleswig-Holstein, Gesetz über die Kammern und die
Berufsgerichtsbarkeit
für
die
Heilberufe
(Heilberufekammergesetz - HBKG) vom 29. Februar 1996,
zuletzt geändert durch Gesetz vom 13.07.2011 (GVOBl. S. 221)
Thüringen, Thüringer Heilberufegesetz (ThürHeilBG) in der
Fassung der Bekanntmachung vom 29.01.2002 (GVBl 2002, S.
125) zuletzt geändert durch Artikel 14 des Gesetzes vom
08.07.2009 (GVBl. S. 592)
Codes of Professional Conduct of the Veterinary Practitioners’
Councils (Berufsordnungen der Kammern)
Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access is restricted to natural persons.
Telemedicine may only be provided in the context of a primary
treatment involving the prior physical presence of a doctor.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Supply services of support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

1083

Measures:

§ 1 and 3 Abs 5 Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz –AÜG § 292
SGB III§ 42 Beschäftigungsverordnung

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality of a Member State of the EU or a commercial
presence in the EU is required in order to obtain a licence to
operate as a temporary employment agency (pursuant to s. 3
paras. 2 and 3 of this Act)
The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs may issue a
regulation concerning the placement and recruitment of non-EU
and non-EEA personnel for specified professions.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

§ 2 para 2, § 11a Apothekengesetz (German Pharmacy Act), §§
43 para. 1, 73 para. 1 Nr. 1a
Arzneimittelgesetz (German Drugs Act),
§ 11 Abs. 3a Medizinproduktegesetz
Verordnung über Vertriebswege für Medizinprodukte

Description:

Investment
Only natural persons are permitted to provide retail services of
pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the public.
Residency is required in order to obtain a licence as a pharmacist
or to open a pharmacy for the retail of pharmaceuticals and
certain medical goods to the public.
Nationals of other countries or persons who have not passed the
German pharmacy exam may only obtain a licence to take over a
pharmacy which has already existed during the preceding three
years.
The total number of pharmacies per person is restricted to one
pharmacy and up to three branch pharmacies.

1084

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

§ 1 und § 2 Flaggenrechtsgesetz vom 8. Februar 1951 (BGBl. I
S. 79), das durch Artikel 561 der Verordnung vom 31. August
2015 (BGBl. I S. 1474) geändert worden ist. § 3 Abs. 2
Schiffsregisterordnung in der Fassung der Bekanntmachung vom
26. Mai 1994 (BGBl. I S. 1133), die zuletzt durch Artikel 156
der Verordnung vom 31. August 2015 (BGBl. I S. 1474)
geändert worden ist.

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

In order to register a seagoing vessel on the national shipping
register, the majority of shares in a vessel must be owned by
nationals of a Member State of the EU or companies established
in accordance with EU law and that have their principal place of
business in a Member State of the EU. The use of the vessel
must be headed and supervised by persons residing in Germany

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport
Supporting services for water transport
Rental of ships

1085

Leasing services of ships without operators
Industry Classification:

CPC 72, CPC 745, CPC 83103, CPC 86751, CPC 86754, CPC
8730

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National - Regional (sub federal)

Measures:

§§ 1, 2 Flaggenrechtsgesetz (Flag Protection Act),§ 2
Verordnung über die Küstenschifffahrt vom 05.07. 2002,
§§ 1, 2 Binnenschifffahrtsaufgabengesetz (BinSchAufgG)
Vorschriften aus der (Schifffahrts-) Patentverordnung in der
Fassung vom 08.04.2008
§ 9 Abs.2 Nr. 1 Seelotsgesetz vom 08.12. 2010 (BGBl. I S.
1864)
§ 1 Nr. 9, 10, 11 und 13 Seeaufgabengesetz (SeeAufgG),
See-Eigensicherungsverordnung vom 19.09.2005 (BGBl. I S.
2787), geändert durch Artikel 516 Verordnung vom 31.10.2006
(BGBl. I S. 2407)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A vessel that does not belong to a national of a Member State of
the EU may be used in the German federal waterways only after
specific authorisation.
Cabotage operations may only be performed by vessels flying
German or another Member State of the EU flag. Waivers for
non-EU vessels may only be granted if no EU vessels are
available or if they are available under very unfavourable
conditions, or on the basis of reciprocity. Waivers for vessels
flying under the Canadian flag may be granted on the basis of
reciprocity (§ 2 para. 3 KüSchVO)
All activities falling within the scope of the pilot law are
regulated and accreditation is restricted to nationals of a Member
State of the EU, a Member State of the EEA orthe Swiss
Confederation.
For rental or leasing of ships with or without operators, the
conclusion of contracts for freight transport by ships flying a
foreign flag or the chartering of such vessels may be restricted,
depending on the availability of ships flying under the German
flag or the flag of another Member State of the EU.

1086

Transactions between residents and non-residents concerning:
(a) the rental of internal waterways vessels, which are not
registered in the economic area;
(b) the transport of freight with such internal waterways vessels;
or
(c) the towing services by such internal waterways vessels
within the economic area may be restricted.
***

1087

Reservations applicable in Greece
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law No 1892/90

Description:

Investment
For foreign natural or legal persons, discretionary permission
from the Ministry of Defence is needed for acquisition of real
estate in the border regions either directly or through equity
participation in a company which is not listed in the Greek Stock
Exchange and which owns real estate in those regions, or any
change in the persons of the stockholders of such company.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lawyers Code (Law 3026/1954), as amended by Presidential
Decree 172/1989

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts. Only nationals of
a Member State of the EEA or of the Swiss Confederation may
be admitted to the Bar, and are thus entitled to provide legal
services in respect of domestic law.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
1088

Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Presidential Decree 226/1992
Law 3693/2008 on Auditing Standards (Implementation of
Directive 2006/43/EC)
Law 3386/2005 on the entry, residency and integration of foreign
nationals in Greece
Law 3844/2010 on Services (Implementation of Directive
2006/123/EC)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required in order to
obtain a licence to be a statutory auditor. By Regulatory Act, the
ELTE (Epitropi Logistikis Typopoiissis Kai Elenchon)
(Oversight Body in Greece) may issue a licence to an auditor
who is a national of Canada or of any third country if, in its
discretion, the conditions laid down in Articles 4 and 6 to 11 of
Law 3693/2008 is met.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1089

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Precidential
Degree
38/2010,
Ministerial
165261/IA/2010 (Gov. Gazette 2157/B)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services

Decision

Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required to supply
veterinary services.

Sector:

Business services and health and social services

Sub-Sector:

Services provided by nurses, physiotherapists and paramedical
personnel

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC93123, CPC 93191

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 1666/1986

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Greek nationality is required for dental technicians.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:
Description:

National
Law 5607/1932 as amended by Laws 1963/1991 and 3918/2011
Investment
Only natural persons, who are licenced pharmacists, and
companies founded by licenced pharmacists, are permitted to
provide retail services of pharmaceuticals and specific medical
1090

goods to the public.
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required in order to
operate a pharmacy.

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Primary education services
Secondary education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Laws 682/1977, 284/1968, 2545/1940 and Presidential Degree
211/1994 as amended by Presidential Degree 394/1997

Description:

Investment
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required for owners
and a majority of the members of the board of directors in
privately funded primary and secondary schools, and for teachers
in privately funded primary and secondary education.

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Constitution of Hellas, art. 16, par. 5 and Law 3549/2007

Description:

Investment
Education at university level shall be provided exclusively by
institutions which are fully self-governed public law legal

1091

persons.
However, Law 3696/2008 permits the establishment by EU
residents (natural or legal persons) of private tertiary education
institutions granting certificates which are not recognised as being
equivalent to university degrees.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Legislative Degree 400/1970

Description:

Financial Services
The right of establishment does not cover the creation of
representative offices or other permanent presence of insurance
companies, except where such offices are established as
agencies, branches or head offices.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Tourist guides services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Presidential
Degree
38/2010,
Ministerial
165261/IA/2010 (Gov. Gazette 2157/B)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services

Decision

Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required in order to
provide tourist guide services.

1092

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code of Public Maritime Law (Degree no 187/1973, as amended
by Presidential Degree no 11/2000, art. 5

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Over 50 per cent of shares of a seagoing vessel must be owned
by EU or nationals of a Member State of the EEA or companies
in order to be registered on the registry of Greece. The vessel
must be managed from Greece.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code of Public Maritime Law (Legislative Degree 187/1973)

1093

Description:

Investment
Public monopoly imposed in port areas for cargo-handling
services.

Sector:

Road transport

Sub-Sector:

Operators of road freight transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:
Measures:

Description:

National
Licensing of road freight transport operators: Greek law
3887/2010 (Government Gazette A’ 174), as amended by art. 5
of law 4038/2012 (Government Gazette A’ 14)-EC Regulations
1071/09 and 1072/09
Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In order to engage in the occupation of road freight transport
operator a Hellenic licence is needed. Licences are granted on
non–discriminatory terms, under condition of reciprocity Road
freight transport operations established in Greece may only use
vehicles that are registered in Greece.
***

1094

Reservations applicable in Hungary
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Government Decree No. 7/1996 on the Acquisition of Real
Estate by Foreigners

Description:

Investment
The purchase of real estate by non-residents is subject to
obtaining authorisation from the appropriate administrative
authority responsible for the geographical location of the
property.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

ACT XI of 1998 on Attorneys at Law

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Hungarian law, including representation
before courts. Full admission to the Bar is subject to a nationality
condition, coupled with a residency requirement.
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA may be admitted
to the Bar, and are thus entitled to provide legal services in
respect of domestic law.
Commercial presence should take the form of partnership with a
1095

Hungarian barrister (ügyvéd) or a barrister’s office (ügyvédi
iroda).
For foreign lawyers, the scope of legal activities is limited to the
provision of legal advice on home country and international law,
which shall take place on the basis of a collaboration contract
concluded with a Hungarian attorney or a law firm.

Sector:

Legal services

Sub-Sector:

Patent agents

Industry Classification:

CPC 8613

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act XXXII of 1995 on Patent Attorneys

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For supplying patent agent services, residency is required for nonnationals of a Member State of the EEA.

Sector:

Professional services

Sub-Sector:

Taxation advisory services
Architectural services
Engineering services
Integrated engineering services

Industry Classification:

CPC 863, CPC 8671, CPC 8672, CPC 8673

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act LVIII of 1996 on the Professional Chambers of Architects
and Engineers
Act XCII of 2003 on the Rules of Taxation, Decree of the
Ministry of Finance no. 26/2008 on the licensing and registration
of taxation advisory activities

1096

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of the following services, insofar as they are being
supplied by a physical person present in the territory of Hungary,
requires residency:
(a)
Taxation advisory services;
(b)
Architectural services;
(c)
Engineering services (only applicable to graduate
trainees); and
(d)
Integrated Engineering services.

Sector:

Professional services

Sub-Sector:

Landscape architectural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8674

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act LVIII of 1996 on the Professional Chambers of Architects
and Engineers

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of landscape architectural services by non-nationals
of a Member State of the EEA requires residency. The supply of
landscape architecture services is therefore only available to
service suppliers established or resident in the EEA.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act CXXVII of 2012 on the Hungarian Veterinary Chamber and
on the conditions how to supply Veterinary services
1097

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For supplying veterinary services, membership of the Hungarian
Veterinary Chamber is required. Only nationals of a Member
State of the EEA may be admitted to the Chamber.
Authorisation for establishment is subject to an economic needs
test. Main criteria: labour market conditions in the sector.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services related to management consulting – arbitration and
conciliation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86602

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act LV of 2002 on Mediation

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
An authorisation, by means of admission into the register, by the
minister in charge of the juridical system is required for the
pursuit of mediation (such as arbitration and conciliation)
activities which may only be granted to juridical or natural
persons that are established in or resident in Hungary.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Translation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87905

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree of the Council of Ministers No. 24/1986 on Official
translation and interpretation

1098

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Official translations, official certifications of translations, and
certified copies of official documents in foreign languages may
only be provided by the National Translation and Authentication
Office (OFFI).

1099

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:

Description:

National
Act XCVIII of 2006 on the General Provisions Relating to the
Reliable and Economically Feasible Supply of Medicinal
Products and Medical Aids and on the Distribution of Medicinal
Products
Investment
EEA nationality is required in order to operate a pharmacy.
Establishment authorisation is subject to an economic needs test.
Main criteria: density conditions in the area.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services

Industry Classification:

CPC 811, CPC 813

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act CCXXXVII of 2013 on Credit Institutions and Financial
Enterprises

Description:

Financial Services
Non-EEA companies may provide financial services or engage
in activities auxiliary to financial services solely through their
Hungarian branch.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services

Industry Classification:

CPC 811, CPC 813

1100

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act CCXXXVII of 2013 on Credit Institutions and Financial
Enterprises; Act CXX of 2001 on the Capital Market

Description:

Financial Services
The board of directors of a credit institution shall have at least
two members recognised as resident according to foreign
exchange regulations and having had prior permanent residence
in Hungary for at least one year.
Branches of non-EEA investment fund management companies
may not engage in the management of European investment
funds and may not provide asset management services to private
pension funds.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Travel agencies and tour operators services
Tourist guide services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7471, CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act CLXIV of 2005 on Trade, Government Decree No.
213/1996 (XII.23.) on Travel Organization and Agency
Activities

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of Travel Agent and Tour Operators services, and
Tourist Guide Services on a cross-border basis is subject to a
licence issued by the Hungarian Trade Licensing Office.
Licences are reserved to nationals of a Member State of the EEA
and juridical persons having their seats in the EEA Member
States.

1101

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.10502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act XLII of 2000 on Shipping

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
To register a vessel in Hungary in order to fly a national flag, a
majority EEA-ownership of the vessel is required. EEA
nationality is required for the captain and first officer of vessels.
***

1102

Reservations applicable in Ireland
Sector:

Agriculture and hunting

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 1531

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Agriculture Produce (Cereals) Act, 1933

Description:

Investment
Establishment by Canadian residents in flour milling activities is
subject to authorisation.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Mining of coal and lignite
Extraction of peat
Mining of metal ores
Other mining and quarrying
Services Incidental to Mining

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 10, ISIC rev 3.1 13, ISIC rev 3.1 14, CPC 883

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National and regional

Measures:

Minerals Development Acts 1940 – 1999, Planning Acts and
Environmental Regulations

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A Prospecting License gives the holder the right to explore for
certain specific minerals. Only holders of current Prospecting
Licenses are considered for State Mining Leases or Licenses to
develop such minerals within the lease or licence area, whether
the minerals are State-owned or privately-owned.
Exploration and mining companies operating in Ireland are
required to have a presence there. In the case of minerals
1103

exploration, there is a requirement that companies (Irish and
foreign) employ either the services of an agent or a resident
exploration manager in Ireland while work is being undertaken.
In the case of mining, it is a requirement that a State Mining
Lease or License be held by a company incorporated in Ireland,
which has power in its memorandum of association to comply
with the various covenants in the Lease or License.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Solicitors Acts 1954-2011

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Irish law, including representation before
courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in order to
obtain full admission to the Bar.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
Lawyers in Ireland are divided into two distinct categories:
solicitors and barristers. The Law Society of Ireland is the
statutory legal professional body that governs admission of
solicitors in Ireland. The Honorable Society of King’s Inns
governs the admission of barristers in Ireland.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

1104

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Veterinary Practice Act 2005

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access through partnership or natural persons only.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Mercantile Marine Act 1955 as amended by the Merchant
Shipping (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1998

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Foreign investors investing in a body corporate established under
and subject to the law of a Member State of the EU, and which
has its principal office in Ireland or another Member State of the
EU, may register a vessel on the Irish Ship Register.
***

1105

Reservations applicable in Italy
Sector:

Publishing and printing

Sub-Sector:

ISIC rev 3.1 221, ISIC rev 3.1 222

Industry Classification:

National treatment
Market access

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 416/1981, art. 1 (and subsequent amendments)

Description:

Investment
In so far as Canada and its provinces and territories allow Italian
nationals and enterprises to conduct these activities, Italy will
allow nationals of Canada and enterprises to conduct these
activities under the same conditions.
In so far as Canada and its provinces and territories allow Italian
investors to own more than 49 per cent of the capital and voting
rights in a Canadian publishing company, then Italy will allow
Canadian investors to own more than 49 per cent of the capital
and voting rights in an Italian publishing company under the
same conditions.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Royal Decree 1578/1933, art. 17 law on the legal profession

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Italian law, including representation before
courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in order to
obtain full admission to the Bar.
1106

To provide legal services in respect of EU and Italian law,
commercial presence may be required to take one of the legal
forms which are allowed under national law on a nondiscriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may be reserved
exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a nondiscriminatory basis.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and bookkeeping services
Auditing services
Taxation advisory services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212,CPC 86213, CPC 86219, CPC 86220,
CPC 863

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Auditing: Legislative Decree 58/1998, art. 155, 158 and 161
Decree of the President of the Republic 99/1998
Legislative Decree 39/2010, art. 2
Accounting, Bookkeeping and Taxation: Legislative Decree
139/2005, Law 248/2006

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For auditing services or taxation advisory services, residency in
Italy is required for individual auditors or tax advisors.
Residence or business domicile is required for enrolment in the
professional register, which is necessary for the provision of
accounting and bookkeeping services.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services
Engineering services
Urban planning and landscape architectural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671, CPC 8672, CPC 8673, CPC 8674
1107

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Royal Decree 2537/1925 regulation on the profession of
architect and engineer
Law 1395/1923
Decree of the President of the Republic (D.P.R.) 328/2001

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency in Italy is required for enrolment in the professional
register, which is necessary for the practice of the profession.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Legislative Decree C.P.S. 233/1946, arts. 7-9
Decree of the President of the Republic (DPR) 221/1950, par. 7

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency in Italy is required for enrolment in the professional
register, which is necessary for the practice of the profession.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Research and development services relating to social sciences
and humanities - psychologists

Industry Classification:

CPC 852

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1108

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 56/1989 on the psychologist profession

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency in Italy is required for enrolment in the professional
register, which is necessary for the practice of the profession.
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required to practice the
profession, except foreign professionals may be allowed to
practice based on reciprocity.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Engineering related scientific and technical consulting services
Technical testing and analysis services
Services incidental to agriculture

Industry Classification:

CPC 8675, CPC 8676, part of CPC 881

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Geologists: Law 112/1963, arts. 2 and 5; D.P.R. 1403/1965, art.
1
Biologists, chemical analysts: Law 396/1967 on the profession
of biologists; Royal Decree 842/1928 on the profession of
chemical analysts
Agronomists: Law 3/1976 on the profession of agronomists
“Periti agrari”: Law 434/1968 as amended by Law 54/1991

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency or professional domicile in Italy is required for
enrolment in the geologists' register, which is necessary for the
practice of the professions of surveyor or geologist in order to
provide services relating to exploration and the operation of
mines, etc. There is a nationality of a Member State of the EU
requirement, however, foreigners may enrol under condition of
reciprocity.
For biologists, chemical analysts, agronomists and "periti

1109

agrari", residency and enrolment in the professional register is
required. Third country nationals can enrol under condition of
reciprocity.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Mining of coal and lignite
Extraction of peat
Extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas
Mining of metal ores
Other mining and quarrying
Engineering related scientific and technical consulting services
Services incidental to mining

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 10, ISIC rev 3.1 11, ISIC rev 3.1 12, ISIC rev 3.1
13, ISIC rev 3.1 14, CPC 8675, CPC 883

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National and regional (for exploration)

Measures:

Exploration services: Royal Decree 1447/1927; Legislative
Decree 112/1998, art. 34

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Mines belonging to the State have specific exploration and
mining rules. Prior to any exploitation activity, a permit for
exploration is needed (“permesso di ricerca”, art. 4 Royal Decree
1447/1927). This permit has a duration, defines exactly the
borders of the ground under exploration and more than one
exploration permit may be granted for the same area to different
persons or companies (this type of licence is not necessarily
exclusive).
In order to cultivate and exploit minerals, an authorisation
(“concessione”, art. 14) from the regional authority is required.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

1110

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on public security (TULPS) 773/1931, arts. 133-141,
Royal Decree 635/1940, art. 257

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality of a Member State of the EU and residency is required
in order to obtain the necessary authorisation to supply security
guard services and the transport of valuables.

Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Distribution of tobacco

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 6222, part of CPC 6310

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Legislative Decree 184/2003
Law 165/1962
Law 3/2003
Law 1293/1957
Law 907/1942
Decree of the President of the Republic (D.P.R.) 1074/1958

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In order to distribute and sell tobacco, a licence is needed. The
licence is granted through public procedures. The granting of
licences is subject to an economic needs test. Main criteria:
population and geographical density of existing selling points.
For an intermediary between wholesale and retail, owners of
magazines (magazzini), nationality of a Member State of the EU
is required.

1111

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:

National
Law 362/1991, arts. 1, 4, 7 and 9
Legislative Decree CPS 233/1946, arts. 7-9
Decree of the President of the Republic (D.P.R. 221/1950, pars.
3 and 7

Description:

Investment
An authorisation is needed to open a pharmacy which is subject to
an economic needs test. Main criteria: population and
geographical density of existing pharmacies. New or vacant
pharmacies are authorised following a public competition. Only
nationals of a Member State of the EU enrolled in the Register of
pharmacists (“albo”) are able to participate in a public
competition.
The practice of the profession is possible only for natural persons
enrolled in the register, as well as for juridical persons in the form
of partnerships, where every partner of the company must be an
enrolled pharmacist. Enrolment in the pharmacist professional
register requires nationality of a Member State of the EU or
residency and the practice of the profession in Italy.
Foreign nationals having the necessary qualifications may enrol if
they are citizens of a country with whom Italy has a special
agreement, authorising the exercise of the profession, under
condition of reciprocity (D. Lgsl. CPS 233/1946 arts. 7-9 and
D.P.R. 221/1950 pars. 3 and 7).

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 92

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1112

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Royal Decree 1592/1933 (Law on secondary education)
Law 243/1991 (Occasional public contribution for private
universities)
Resolution 20/2003 of CNVSU (Comitato nazionale per la
valutazione del sistema universitario)
Decree of the President of the Republic (DPR) 25/1998

Description:

Investment
An economic needs test is applied for the opening of privately
funded universities authorised to issue recognised diplomas or
degrees based on a three year programme. Main criteria:
population and density of existing establishments.
Only Italian juridical persons may be authorised to issue staterecognised diplomas.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 194/1942, art. 4
Law 4/1999 on the register

Description:

Financial Services
Residency in Italy is required for enrolment in the actuarial
register, which is necessary for the practice of the actuarial
profession.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:

1113

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Legislative Decree 58/1998, arts. 1, 19, 28, 30-33, 38, 69 and 80
Joint Regulation of Bank of Italy and Consob 22.2.1998, arts. 3
and 41
Regulation of Bank of Italy 25.1.2005, Title V, Chapter VII,
Section II
Consob Regulation 16190 of 29.10.2007, arts. 17-21, 78-81, 91111

Description:

Financial Services
In order to be authorised to manage the securities settlement
system or central securities depository services with an
establishment in Italy, a company is required to be incorporated
in Italy (no branches).
In the case of collective investment schemes other than
undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities
(“UCITS”) harmonised under EU legislation, the trustee or
depository is required to be incorporated in Italy or in another
Member State of the EU and established through a branch in
Italy. Management enterprises of UCITS not harmonised under
EU legislation are also required to be incorporated in Italy (no
branches).
Only banks, insurance enterprises, investment firms and
enterprises managing UCITS harmonised under EU legislation
having their legal head office in the EU, as well as UCITS
incorporated in Italy may carry out the activity of pension fund
resources management.
In providing the activity of door-to-door selling, intermediaries
must utilise authorised financial salesmen resident within the
territory of a Member State of the EU.
Representative offices of non-EU intermediaries cannot carry out
activities aimed at providing investment services, including
trading for own account and for account of customers, placement
and underwriting of financial instruments (branch required).

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

1114

Sub-Sector:

Tourist guides services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Regional

Measures:

Law 135/2001 arts. 7.5 and 6
Law 40/2007 (DL 7/2007)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Tourist guides from non-EU countries need to obtain a specific
licence from the Region in order to act as a professional tourist
guide. Tourist guides from Member States of the EU can work
freely without the requirement for such a licence. The licence is
granted to tourist guides demonstrating adequate competence
and knowledge.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Legal basis Royal Decree 327/1942 (modified with Law
222/2007), art. 143 and 221 (Navigation Code)

1115

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
Foreigners other than EU residents cannot own a majority
interest in Italian flagged vessels or a controlling interest in ship
owning companies having their headquarters in Italy.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Shipping Code
Law 84/1994
Ministerial decree 585/1995

Description:

Investment
An Economic Needs Test is applied for maritime cargo-handling
services. Main criteria: number of and impact on existing
establishments, population density, geographic spread and
creation of new employment.
***

1116

Reservations applicable in Latvia
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on land reform in the cities of the Republic of Latvia, ss. 20,
21
Law on land privatisation in rural areas, s. 28

Description:

Investment
Acquisition of urban land by nationals of Canada or of a third
country is permitted through incorporated companies registered
in Latvia or other Member States of the EU:
(a) if more than 50 per cent of their equity capital is owned by
nationals of Member States of the EU, the Latvian Government or
a municipality, separately or in total;
(b) if more than 50 per cent of their equity capital is owned by
natural persons and companies of third country with whom Latvia
has concluded bilateral agreements on promotion and reciprocal
protection of investments and which have been approved by the
Latvian Parliament before 31 December 1996;
(c) if more than 50 per cent of their equity capital is possessed by
natural persons and companies of third country with whom Latvia
has concluded bilateral agreements on promotion and reciprocal
protection of investments after 31 December 1996, if in those
agreements the rights of Latvian natural persons and companies
on acquisition of land in the respective third country have been
determined;
(d) if more than 50 per cent of their equity capital is possessed by
persons from a) to c) together;
e) which are public joint stock companies, if their shares thereof
are quoted in the stock exchange.
Where Canada and its provinces and territories allow Latvian
nationals and enterprises to purchase urban real estate in their
territories, Latvia will allow nationals of Canada and enterprises

1117

to purchase urban real estate in Latvia under the same conditions
as Latvian nationals.
Sector:

Distribution and health services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods
Other services provided by pharmacists

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Pharmaceutical Law, s. 38

Description:

Investment
In order to commence independent practice in a pharmacy, a
foreign pharmacist or pharmacist’s assistant, educated in a state
which is not a Member State of the EU or a Member State of the
EEA, must work for at least one year in a pharmacy under the
supervision of a pharmacist.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Criminal Procedure Law, s. 79
Advocacy Law of the Republic of Latvia, s. 4

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In order to obtain full admission to the Bar, which is required to
practice as a sworn solicitor or as an assistant of a sworn
solicitor, Latvian nationality is required. Sworn solicitors who
are nationals of a Member State of the EU, and who have
registered in the Latvian Council of Sworn Advocates, have the
right to participate and vote in the General Meeting of Sworn
Advocates.

1118

Providing domestic legal services (the services of an advocate
and legal representation in criminal proceedings) in Latvia in
accordance with its law is only permitted by:
(a) a sworn solicitor or an assistant of a sworn solicitor holding
Latvian nationality; or
(b) a national of a Member State of the EU who has been
designated as an advocate in one of the Member States of the
EU; or
(c) a foreign advocate, in the framework of an agreement on
legal assistance concluded between Latvia and the relevant
foreign country.
For advocates of a Member State of the EU or foreign advocates,
special requirements exist. For example, participation in court
proceedings in criminal cases is only permitted in association
with an advocate of the Latvian Collegium of Sworn Advocates.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Sworn Auditors

Description:

Investment
In a commercial company of sworn auditors, a foreign investor
may only own more than 50 per cent of the voting capital shares,
if they are qualified as sworn auditors or commercial companies
of sworn auditors, or auditors or commercial companies of
auditors of Member States of the EU or Member States of the
EEA, who, in accordance with laws of the Member State of the
EU or the Member State of the EEA, are entitled to pursue the
1119

professional activity of a sworn auditor or a company of sworn
auditors, as this professional activity is defined in the laws of
Latvia.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Printing and publishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 88442

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on the Press and Other Mass Media, s. 8

Description:

Investment
Only legal persons incorporated in Latvia, and natural persons of
Latvia have the right to found and publish mass media. Branches
are not allowed.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

1120

Measures:

Law “Maritime Code”

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

The Latvian flag is granted only to vessels registered in the Ship
Register of Latvia, and these vessels must be managed by EU
registered entity. Foreign owners not incorporated in the EU can
register vessels in the Ship Register, provided that their technical
management is performed by a legal person registered in Latvia
on the basis of a ship management contract.
***

1121

Reservations applicable in Lithuania
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on the Bar of the Republic of Lithuania of 18 March 2004
No. IX-2066 as last amended on 17 November 2011 No.XI-1688
Republic of Lithuania Law on the Notarial profession 15
September 1992 – No I-2882 (As last amended on 19 April 2012
– No X-1979)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA or of the Swiss
Confederation may be admitted to the Bar, and are thus entitled
to provide legal services in respect of domestic law.
Attorneys from foreign countries can act as advocates in court
only in accordance with bilateral agreements on legal assistance.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

1122

Market access
Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Audit of 15 June 1999 No. VIII -1227 (a new version of
3 July 2008 No. X-1676)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Not less than 75 per cent of shares should belong to auditors or
auditing companies of the EU or EEA.
An auditor’s report must be prepared in conjunction with an
auditor accredited to practice in Lithuania.
Establishment is not permitted in the form of a Public Stock
Corporation (AB).

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Patent agents

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 879

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Trade Marks of 10 October 2000 No. VIII-1981
Law on Designs of 7 November 2002 No. IX-1181
Patent Law of 18 January 1994 No. I-372
Law on the Legal Protection of Topographies of Semiconductor
Products of 16 June 1998
Patent Attorneys Regulation, approved by the Order of
Government of the Republic of Lithuania on 20 May 1992
No.362 (as last amended on 8 November 2004 No. 1410)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Third country (non-Member States of the EU) nationals are not
allowed to be registered as patent attorneys. Only patent
attorneys are allowed to provide patent agent services in
Lithuania.

1123

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Distribution of pyrotechnics

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Supervision of Civil Pyrotechnics Circulation (23 March
2004. No. IX-2074)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The distribution of pyrotechnics is subject to licensing. Only the
juridical persons established in the EU may obtain a licence.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Pipeline transport of fuels
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 713, CPC 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on Natural Gas of the Republic of Lithuania of 10 October
2000 No VIII-1973

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Establishment is required. Licences for transmission and
distribution of fuels may only be issued to legal persons of
Lithuania or branches of foreign legal persons or other
organisations (subsidiaries) established in Lithuania.
This reservation does not apply to consultancy services related to
the transmission and distribution on a fee or contract basis of
fuels.

1124

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Transmission and distribution of electricity

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 401, CPC 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law on electricity of the Republic of Lithuania of 20 July 2000
No VIII-1881

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The licences for transmission, distribution, public supply and
organizing of trade of electricity may only be issued to legal
persons of Lithuania or branches of foreign legal person or other
organisations established in Lithuania.
This reservation does not apply to consultancy services related to
the transmission and distribution on a fee or contract basis of
electricity.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev. 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223, CPC
721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Law of the Republic of Lithuania on Merchant Shipping of
12 September 1996, No. I-1513

1125

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
The Lithuanian flag is granted only to vessels registered in the
Lithuanian register of maritime vessels and owned or chartered
(bareboat charter) by a Lithuanian citizen or company
established (incorporated) in Lithuania.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Rail transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 711

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Central

Measures:

Railway transport Code of the Republic of Lithuania of 22 April
2004 No. IX-2152 as amended by 8 June 2006 No. X-653.

Description:

Investment
The exclusive rights for the provision of transit services are
granted to railway undertakings which are owned, or whose
stock is 100 per cent owned, by the state.
***

1126

Reservations applicable in Luxembourg
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Loi du 16 décembre 2011 modifiant la loi du 10 août 1991 sur la
profession d’avocat

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Luxembourg law, including representation
before courts.
Nationality of a Member State of the EU and residency
(commercial presence) is required in order to obtain full
admission to the Bar. The Council of the Order may, on the basis
of reciprocity, agree to waive the nationality requirement for a
foreign national.
To provide legal services in respect of Luxembourg law,
commercial presence may be required to take one of the legal
forms which are allowed under national law on a nondiscriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may be reserved
exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a nondiscriminatory basis.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Loi du 4 juillet 1973 concernant le régime de la pharmacie
(annex a043)
Règlement grand-ducal du 27 mai 1997 relatif à l’octroi des

1127

concessions de pharmacie (annex a041)
Règlement grand-ducal du 11 février 2002 modifiant le
règlement grand-ducal du 27 mai 1997 relatif à l’octroi des
concessions de pharmacie (annex a017)
Description:

Investment
Only natural persons are permitted to provide retail services of
pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the public.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 9 November 1990

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Foreign investors that are not nationals of a Member State of the
EU or not incorporated in the EU or having their principal office
in the EU, cannot own 50 per cent or more of a seagoing vessel
flying the flag of Luxembourg.
This reservation does not apply to a ship that is bareboat
chartered to a charterer that would satisfy the above owner-ship
requirements and is actually making use of the ship.

1128

***

1129

Reservations applicable in Malta
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Immoveable Property (Acquisition By Non-Residents) Act (Cap.
246)
Protocol No 6 of the EU Accession Treaty on the acquisition of
secondary residences in Malta

Description:

Investment
Non-nationals of a Member State of the EU may not acquire
immovable property for commercial purposes.
Companies with 25 per cent (or more) of non-EU shareholding
must obtain an authorisation from the Competent Authority
(Minister responsible for Finance) to buy immovable property
for commercial or business purposes. The Competent Authority
will determine whether the proposed acquisition represents a net
benefit to the Maltese economy.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure (Cap. 12)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Maltese law, including representation
1130

before courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in
order to obtain full admission to the Bar.
To provide legal services in respect of Maltese law, commercial
presence may be required to take one of the legal forms which
are allowed under national law on a non-discriminatory basis.
Some types of legal form may be reserved exclusively to lawyers
admitted to the Bar, also on a non-discriminatory basis.
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA or of the Swiss
Confederation may be admitted to the Bar, and are thus entitled
to provide legal services in respect of Maltese law.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Pharmacy Licence Regulations (LN279/07) issued under the
Medicines Act (Cap. 458)

Description:

Investment
Issuance of Pharmacy licences under specific restrictions. No
person shall have more than one licence in his name in any town
or village (Regulation 5(1) of the Pharmacy Licence Regulations
(LN279/07)), except in the case where there are no further
applications for that town or village (Regulation 5(2) of the
Pharmacy Licence Regulations (LN279/07)).

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services
Adult education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

1131

Measures:

Legal Notice 296 of 2012

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Service suppliers seeking to provide privately funded higher or
adult education services must obtain a licence from the Ministry
of Education and Employment. The decision on whether to issue
a licence may be discretionary.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport
Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 721, part of 742, CPC 745,part of CPC 749

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Gozo Passenger and Goods Service (SL499.31)
Exclusive rights are allocated through public procurement
procedures on the basis of contracts

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A licence is required from Transport Malta for the Rental of
Vessels with Crew for vessels trading exclusively within local
waters. Specific Public Service Obligations govern commercial
shipping exclusively within Malta’s internal waters.
Regarding the cabotage restriction between Malta and Gozo,
exclusive rights are given according on the basis of a concession
awarded by the Government. This exclusivity only relates to the
route Malta-Gozo between the Port of Ċirkewwa and the Port of
Marsamxetto (Malta) and the Port of Mġarr (Gozo) for the
carriage of passengers, vehicles and goods.The tariffs for such
services are regulated by law through the Gozo Passenger and
Goods Service (SL499.31).
Nationality condition for supporting services.

Sector:

Transport services

1132

Sub-Sector:

Other transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:
Description:

Taxi Services Regulations (SL499.59)
Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Taxis: Numerical restrictions on the number of licences apply.
Karozzini (horse drawn carriages): Numerical Restrictions on the
number of licences apply.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:
Description:

Enemalta Act (Cap. 272)
Investment
EneMalta plc has a monopoly for the provision of electricity.
***

1133

Reservations applicable in the Netherlands
Sector:

Supporting services for all modes of transport

Sub-Sector:

Customs clearance services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 748

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

General Customs Act (Algemene Douanewet)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The admittance of natural or juridical persons to act as customs
representatives is subject to discretion by the inspector, as
provided by articles 1(3) and 1(9) of the General Customs Act
(Algemene Douanewet). Customs representatives who are not a
resident of or established in the Netherlands are required to take
up residence or establish a fixed location in the Netherlands,
before they may perform activities as an admitted customs
representative.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Advocatenwet (Act on Advocates)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
1134

law on a non-discriminatory basis.
Only locally-licensed lawyers may use the name or title
“Lawyer” according to articles 2(c), and 16(b), (c), (d)
Advocatenwet (Act on Advocates). Only lawyers registered in
the Dutch registry can use the title ‘advocate’. Instead of using
the full term ‘advocate’, (non-registered) foreign lawyers are
obliged to mention their home country professional organisation
for the purposes of their activities in the Netherlands.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Hallmarking services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 893

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Waarborgwet 1986

Description:

Investment
To provide hallmarking services, commercial presence in the
Netherlands is required. The hallmarking of precious metal
articles is currently exclusively granted to two Dutch public
monopolies.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Wet op de uitoefening van de diergeneeskunde 1990 (WUD)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access is restricted to natural persons.

1135

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.10502, CPC 5133, CPC5223, CPC
721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Art. 311, paragraph 1.b of the Commercial Code (Wetboek van
Koophandel)

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
The ownership of a Dutch registered seagoing vessel is only
possible for:
(a) natural persons with the nationality of a Member State of the
EU, the EEA or the Swiss Confederation;
(b) companies or legal entities under the law of a Member State
of the EU, one of the countries, islands or areas as meant in
Articles 349 and in paragraphs 1 through 4 and paragraph 5(c) of
Article 355 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, or of a Member State of the EEA or the Swiss
Confederation; and
(c) natural persons or companies or legal entities other than
above which can claim the European right of free establishment
or settlement due to an agreement between the EU and a third
country.
The owner must have a principal office or a subsidiary in the
Netherlands. One or more natural persons domiciled in the
Netherlands must have the responsibility for the ship, captain,
crew and related matters, and have the authority to decide and
represent on behalf of the owner.
It is not possible to register a seagoing ship that is already
1136

registered in a public register, either as a seagoing ship or as an
inland navigation vessel, or in any similar foreign register.
When making a request for a registration, the applicant shall
elect a domicile within the Netherlands.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity distribution
Transportation of natural gas

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 040, CPC 71310

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Elektriciteitswet 1998
Gaswet

Description:

Investment
The ownership of the electricity network and the gas pipeline
network are exclusively granted to the Dutch government
(transmission systems) and other public authorities (distribution
systems).

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:

Extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 10, ISIC rev 3.1 11, ISIC rev 3.1 12, ISIC rev 3.1
13, ISIC rev 3.1 14

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Mijnbouwwet (Mining Act)

Description:

Investment
The exploration for and exploitation of hydrocarbons in the
Netherlands is always performed jointly by a private company
and the public (limited) company designated by the Minister of
Economic Affairs. Articles 81 and 82 of the Mining Act stipulate

1137

that all shares in this designated company must be directly or
indirectly held by the Dutch State.
***

1138

Reservations applicable in Poland
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law of 24th March 1920 on the Acquisition of Real Estate by
Foreigners (Journal of Laws of 2004 No. 167, item 1758 with
later amendments)

Description:

Investment
The acquisition of real estate, direct and indirect, by foreigners
requires a permit. A permit is issued through an administrative
decision by a minister competent in internal affairs, with the
consent of the Minister of National Defence, and in the case of
agricultural real estate, also with the consent of the Minister of
Agriculture and Rural Development.

Sector:

Publishing and printing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 221, ISIC rev 3.1 222

Type of Reservation:

Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act of 26 January 1984 on Press law, Journal of Laws, No. 5,
item 24, with subsequent amendments

Description:

Investment
Nationality condition for the editor-in-chief of newspapers and
journals.

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Types of establishment
1139

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act of 2 July 2004 on freedom of economic activity, arts. 13.3
and 95. 1

Description:

Investment
The scope of operations of a representative office may only
encompass advertising and promotion of the foreign parent
company represented by the office.
For all sectors except legal services and services provided by
healthcare units, non-EU investors may undertake and conduct
economic activity only in the form of a limited partnership,
limited joint-stock partnership, limited liability company, and
joint-stock company, while domestic companies have access also
to the forms of non-commercial partnership companies (general
partnership and unlimited liability partnership).

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act of 5 July 2002 on the provision by foreign lawyers of legal
assistance in the Republic of Poland, art. 19

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
Foreign lawyers may establish only in the form of a registered
partnership a limited partnership, or a limited joint-stock
partnership while domestic companies have access also to the
forms of civil law partnership and professional partnership.

1140

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act of 7 May 2009 on statutory auditors, audit firms and on
public oversight - Journal of Laws, No. 77, item 649, with
subsequent amendments

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Audit firms may be established only in certain Polish legal
forms.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law of 21st December 1990 on the Profession of Veterinary
Surgeon and Chambers of Veterinary Surgeons

Description:

Investment
For the provision of veterinary services by a physical person
present in the territory of Poland, only nationals of a Member
State of the EU may provide veterinary services. Foreign persons
may apply for permission to practice.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Translation and interpretation services

1141

Industry Classification:

CPC 87905

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act of 25 November 2004 on the profession of sworn translator
or interpreter (Journal of Laws no 273 item 2702), art. 2.1

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only natural persons may be sworn translators.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act on insurance activity of May 22, 2003 (Journal of Laws
2003, No 124, item 1151)
Act on insurance mediation of May 22, 2003 (Journal of Laws
2003, No 124, item 1154), arts. 16 and 31

Description:

Financial Services
Local incorporation (no branches) required for insurance
intermediaries.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for air transport

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 742

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1142

Level of Government:
Measures:
Description:

National
Polish Aviation Law of 3 July 2002, Articles 174.2 and 174.3 3
Investment
For storage services of frozen or refrigerated goods and bulk
storage services of liquids or gases at airports, the possibility to
supply certain categories of services will depend on the size of the
airport. The number of suppliers in each airport may be limited
due to available space constraints, and to not less than two
suppliers for other reasons.
For airport operation services, foreign participation is limited to
49 per cent.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Production, transmission and distribution of electricity
Bulk storage services of liquids or gases
Services incidental to energy distribution
Wholesale or retail of electricity

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 040, CPC 63297, CPC 74220, CPC 887

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:
Description:

National
Energy Law Act of 10 April 1997, arts. 32 and 33
Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The following activities are subject to licensing under the Energy
Law Act:
(a) the generation of fuels or energy, except for: generation of
solid or gaseous fuels; generation of electricity using electricity
sources of the total capacity of not more than 50 MW other than
renewable energy sources; cogeneration of electricity and heat
using sources of the total capacity of not more than five MW
other than renewable energy sources; generation of heat using
the sources of the total capacity of not more than five MW;
(b) storage of gaseous fuels in storage installations, liquefaction

1143

of natural gas and regasification of liquefied natural gas at LNG
installations, as well as the storage of liquid fuels, except for: the
local storage of liquid gas at installations of the capacity of less
than one MJ/s capacity and the storage of liquid fuels in retail
trade;
(c) the transmission or distribution of fuels or energy, except for:
the distribution of gaseous fuels in grids of less than 1 MJ/s
capacity and the transmission or distribution of heat if the total
capacity ordered by customers does not exceed 5 MW;
(d) the trade in fuels or energy, except for: the trade in solid
fuels; the trade in electricity using installations of voltage lower
than one kV owned by the customer; the trade in gaseous fuels if
their annual turnover value does not exceed the equivalent of
EUR 100,000; the trade in liquid gas, if the annual turnover
value does not exceed EUR 10,000; and the trade in gaseous
fuels and electricity performed on commodity exchanges by
brokerage houses which conduct the brokerage activity on the
exchange commodities on the basis of the Act of 26 October
2000 on commodity exchanges, as well as the trade in heat if the
capacity ordered by the customers does not exceed five MW.
The limits on turnover do not apply to wholesale trade services
in gaseous fuels or liquid gas or to retail services of bottled gas.
A licence may only be granted by the Competent Authority to an
applicant that has registered their principal place of business or
residence in the territory of a Member State of the EU, Member
State of the EEA or the Swiss Confederation.
***

1144

Reservations applicable in Portugal
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 15/2005, arts. 203,194
PortugueseBarStatute (Estatuto da Ordem dos Advogados) and
Decree-Law 229/2004, arts. 5, 7 - 9
Decree-law 88/2003, arts. 77 and 102
Solicitadores Public Professional Association Statute (Estatuto da
Câmara dos Solicitadores), as amended by Law 49/2004, by Law
14/2006 and by Decree-Law n.º 226/2008
Law 78/2001, arts. 31, 4.
Regulation of family and labour mediation (Ordinance 282/2010)
Law 21/2007 on criminal mediation, art. 12
Law 32/2004 (as modified by Decree-Law 282/2007 and Law
34/2009) on Insolvency administrator, arts. 3 and 5, among others
Decree-Law 54/2004, art. 1 (Regime jurídico das sociedades de
administradores de insolvência)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services, including representation before courts. Residency
(commercial presence) is required in order to practice Portuguese
law. The recognition of qualifications to practice Portuguese law
is subject to a condition of reciprocity.
To provide legal services, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.
Only law firms where the shares belong exclusively to lawyers
admitted to the Portuguese Bar can practice in Portugal; access
to the profession of "solicitadores" is subject to a nationality of a
1145

Member State of the EU condition.
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting services
Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, CPC 86213, CPC 86219

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 452/99, amended and republished by Decree-Law
310/2009 – Portuguese Public Professional Association Statute
for Accountants (Estatuto da Ordem dos Técnicos Oficiais de
Contas), arts. 85, 87
Decree-Law 487/99, amended and republished by Decree-Law
224/2008 – Portuguese Public Professional Association for
Statutory Auditors (Estatuto da Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais de
Contas). Arts. 95-97

Description:

Investment
Accounting services: Only locally licensed accountants can own
accountancy firms. However, accounting services may also be
provided by a legal person incorporated under the Portuguese
company code without such ownership restrictions, in so far as
the actual accounting services are provided by a locally licensed
accountant

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Collection agency services
Credit reporting services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87901, CPC 87902

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 49/2004

1146

Description:

Investment
Nationality of a Member State of the EU is required for the
provision of collection agency services and credit reporting
services.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Industrial property agent

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 15/95, as modified by Law 17/2010, on industrial
property agents, art. 2
Portaria 1200/2010, art. 5

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Industrial property agents are subject to a condition of
nationality of a Member State of the EEA.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 368/91 (Statute of the Veterinary Professional
Association)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency is required in order to provide veterinary services.

1147

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, CPC 822

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 211/2004 (arts. 3 and 25), as amended and
republished by Decree-Law 69/2011

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency in a Member State of the EEA is required for natural
persons. Incorporation in a Member State of the EEA is required
for legal persons.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services related to agriculture

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 88

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree Law 119/92
Law 47/2011
Decree Law 183/98

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The professions of biologist, chemical analyst and agronomist
are reserved for natural persons.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

1148

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 34/2013
Ordinance 273/2013

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The provision of security services by a foreign supplier on a crossborder basis is not allowed.
A nationality condition exists for specialised personnel.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retailing Services

Industry Classification:

CPC 631, CPC 632 other than CPC 6321, CPC 63297

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law No. 21/2009, 19 January
Ordinances n.º 417/2009 and 418/2009, 16 April

Description:

Investment
A specific authorisation scheme exists for the installation of
certain retail establishments. This relates to establishments
having a sales area exceeding 2,000 m2, establishments
belonging to a company or pertaining to a commercial group that
have an accumulated sales area equal to or greater than 30 000
m2, or commercial outlets that have a gross floor area greater
than or equal to 8000 m2. Micro-enterprises are excluded.
Main criteria: Contribution to a multiplicity of commercial
offers; assessment of services to consumer; quality of
employment and corporate social responsibility; integration in
urban environment; and contribution to eco-efficiency.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods
1149

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 307/2007, arts. 9, 14, 15
Ordinance 1430/2007

Description:

Investment
Establishment authorisation is subject to an economic needs test.
Main criteria: density conditions in the area.
In commercial companies where the capital is represented by
shares, these shall be nominative. No person may hold or
exercise, at the same time, directly or indirectly, ownership,
operation or management of more than four pharmacies.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Chapter I, Section VI of Decree-Law 94-B/98, arts. 34, nr. 6, 7

Description:

Financial Services
In order to establish a branch in Portugal, foreign insurance
companies need to demonstrate prior operational experience of at
least five years. Direct branching is not permitted for insurance
intermediation, which is reserved to companies formed in
accordance with the law of a Member State of the EU.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

1150

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 12/2006, as amended by Decree-Law 180/2007
Decree-Law 357-A/2007, Regulation 7/2007-R, as amended by
Regulation 2/2008-R
Regulation 19/2008-R
Regulation 8/2009

Description:

Financial Services
Pension fund management may be provided only by specialised
companies incorporated in Portugal for that purpose and by
insurance companies established in Portugal and authorised to
take up the life insurance business, or by entities authorised to
pension fund management in other Member States of the EU.
Direct branching from non-EU countries is not permitted.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5122, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 194/98
Decree-Law 197/98
Decree-Law 331/99

Description:

Investment
To register a vessel on the national shipping register, foreign
1151

investors must have their principal office in Portugal.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 71222

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Decree-Law 41/80, August 21

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Economic needs test for limousine services. Main criteria:
number of and impact on existing establishments, population
density, geographic spread, impact on traffic conditions and
creation of new employment
***

1152

Reservations applicable in Romania
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured –nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law 312/2005, regarding acquisition of property over land by
foreign citizens and stateless persons, as well as foreign legal
persons

Description:

Investment
Foreign nationals, stateless persons and legal persons (other than
nationals of a Member State of the EU and nationals of a
Member State of the EEA) may acquire property rights over
lands, under the conditions regulated by international treaties,
based on reciprocity.
Foreign nationals, stateless persons and juridical persons may
not acquire the property right over lands under more favourable
conditions than those applicable to the national of a Member
State of the EU and to juridical persons established according to
the legislation of a Member State of the EU.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Attorney Law
Law for Mediation
1153

Law for the Notaries and the Notarial Activity
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
A foreign lawyer may practice the legal profession in one of the
forms allowed under national law of their choice, on a nondiscriminatory basis. These legal forms are described in art. 5
para. 1 of the Law 51/1995 (individual law offices, associated
law offices, professional civil companies, or limited-liability
professional civil companies).
A foreign lawyer may not make oral or written conclusions
before the courts and other judicial bodies, except for
international arbitration.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Emergency Governmental Ordinance no. 90/2008, with
subsequent amendments, which transposed the provisions of
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of annual accounts
and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives
78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC and repealing Council Directive
84/253/EEC

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A statutory audit activity shall be carried out only by the
statutory auditors or audit firms who are approved under the
conditions provided for by Emergency Ordinance no. 90/2008.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

1154

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law no. 297/2004 on capital markets
CNVM (“Comisia Nationala a Valorilor Mobiliare”) Regulation
no. 2/2006 on regulated markets and alternative trading systems

Description:

Financial Services
Market operators are Romanian legal persons set up as joint
stock companies according to the provisions of the Company
Law. The alternative trading systems could be managed by a
system operator set up under the conditions described above or
by an investment firm authorised by CNVM.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing , aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5122, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Government Ordinance No. 42 of 28 August 1997
Ministerial Order No. 1627/2006

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

1155

Services,

and

The right to fly the Romanian flag is granted:
(a) to ships owned by Romanian natural or legal persons;
(b) to seagoing ships owned by natural persons having the
nationality of a Member State of the EU or of a Member State of
the European Economic Area or by legal persons established
(having their headquarters) in a Member State of the EU or a
Member State of the EEA;
(c) to ships owned by foreign natural persons having their
domicile or residents of Romania or by the Romanian branches
of the foreign legal persons, other than those mentioned in subparagraph (b); and
(d) to ships owned by foreign natural or legal persons and hired
by means of bare-boat or leasing charters, for periods longer than
one year, by Romanian or foreign natural or legal persons.
Granting the right to fly the Romanian flag is forbidden for ships
of 20 years or more.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Other scheduled passenger transportation
Operators of road freight transport services
Other non-scheduled passenger transportation

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, CPC 7122, CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Romanian law on road transportation (Government Ordinance
no. 27/2011)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Road haulage and road passenger transport operators may only
use vehicles that are registered in Romania, owned and used
according to the Government Ordinance provisions.
***

1156

Reservations applicable in the Slovak Republic
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 586/2003 on Advocacy, art. 2, 12

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of Slovakian law, including representation
before courts. Residency (commercial presence) is required in
order to obtain full admission to the Bar.
To provide legal services in respect of Slovakian law,
commercial presence may be required to take one of the legal
forms which are allowed under national law on a nondiscriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may be reserved
exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a nondiscriminatory basis.
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA or of the Swiss
Confederation may be admitted to the Bar, and are thus entitled
to provide legal services in respect of Slovakian law.

Sector:

Mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 10, ISIC rev 3.1 11, ISIC rev 3.1 12, ISIC rev 3.1
13, ISIC rev 3.1 14, CPC 7131

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 51/1988 on Mining, art. 4a
Act 313/1999 on Geological Activity, art. 5

1157

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For mining, activities related to mining and geological activity,
incorporation in a Member State of the EU or a Member State of
the EEA is required (no branching).

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act No 540/2007 on Auditors, arts. 3, 4, 5

Description:

Investment
Only an enterprise in which at least 60 per cent of capital
interests or voting rights are reserved to Slovak nationals or
nationals of a Member State of the EU may be authorised to
carry out audits in the Slovak Republic.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Architectural services
Urban planning and landscape architectural services Engineering
services
Integrated engineering services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8671, CPC 8672, CPC 8673, CPC 8674

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 138/1992 on Architects and Engineers, arts. 3, 15, 15a, 17a,
18a

1158

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For the provision of these services by a physical person present
in the territory of the Slovak Republic, membership in the
Slovak Chamber of Architects or Slovak Chamber of Engineers
is obligatory. Slovak residency is required for membership.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 442/2004 on Private Veterinary Doctors, art. 2

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Obligatory membership in the Slovak Chamber of Veterinary
Doctors. Residency in the Slovak Republic is required for
membership.
Access is restricted to natural persons only.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 140/1998 on drugs and medical devices, art. 35a
Act 578/2004 on healthcare providers, medical employees,
professional organisation

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency is required in order to obtain a licence as a pharmacist

1159

or to open a pharmacy for the retail of pharmaceuticals and
certain medical goods to the public.

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 92

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law No. 131 of 21 February 2002 on Higher Education and on
Changes and Supplements to Some Laws

Description:

Investment
Establishment in a Member State of the EU is required to apply
for state approval to operate as a privately funded higher
education institution. This reservation does not apply to
secondary technical and vocational education services.

Sector:

Environmental services

Sub-Sector:

Processing and recycling of used batteries and accumulators,
waste oils, old cars and waste from electrical and electronic
equipment

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 9402

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 223/2001 on Waste

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For processing and recycling of used batteries and accumulators,
waste oils, old cars and waste from electrical and electronic
equipment, incorporation in a Member State of the EU or a
Member State of the EEA is required (residency requirement).

1160

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Medical and dental services, midwives services, nursing,
physiotherapeutic and para-medical services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, CPC 9319

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National

Level of Government:

Health services

Measures:

Act 576/2004 on Health Treatment
Act 578/2004 on health care providers, medical employees,
professional organisation

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Services may only be provided by natural persons.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Act 435/2000 on Maritime Navigation, art. 10

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services

1161

In the Slovak Republic, in order to register a vessel on the
national shipping register, legal persons have to be established in
the Slovak Republic and natural persons have to be national of
the Slovak Republic and with permanent residence in the Slovak
Republic.
***

1162

Reservations applicable in Slovenia
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Zakon o odvetništvu (Neuradno prečiščeno besedilo-ZOdvNPB2 Državnega Zbora RS z dne 21.5.2009 (Attorneys Act)
unofficial consolidated text prepared by the Slovenian parliament
from 21 5.2010)

Description:

Investment
Commercial presence for appointed attorneys by the Slovene Bar
Association is restricted to sole proprietorship, law firm with
limited liability (partnership) or to a law firm with unlimited
liability (partnership) only. The activities of a law firm shall be
restricted to the practice of law. Only attorneys may be partners
in a law firm.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting and bookkeeping services
Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, CPC 86213, CPC 86219, CPC 86220

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Zakon o revidiranju (Zrev-2 Uradni list RS,št.65/2008),
(Auditing Act -Official Gazetee RS No 65/2008)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Commercial presence is required.

1163

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, CPC 822

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Real Estate Agencies Act

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
In so far as Canada and its provinces and territories allow
Slovenian nationals and enterprises to supply real estate agent
services, Slovenia will allow nationals of Canada and enterprises
to supply real estate agent services under the same conditions, in
addition to the fulfilment of the following requirements:
entitlement to act as a real estate agent in the country of origin,
submission of the relevant document on impunity in criminal
procedures, and inscription into the registry of real estate agents
at the competent (Slovenian) ministry.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Description:

Law on Pharmacy Activities (Official Gazette No. 36/2004), arts.
2, 6-8, 13-14
Medicinal Products Act (Official Gazette of the RS, no. 31/06,
45/08), arts. 17, 21, 74, 79, 81
Investment
Pharmacy activity can be performed on the basis of concessions
by private persons granted by the competent administrative body
of the commune or municipality with the agreement of the
Ministry of Health, after the prior opinion of the Chamber of

1164

Pharmacy and the Institute for Health Insurance of Slovenia.

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Primary education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 921

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Organisation and Financing of Education Act (Official Gazette
of Republic of Slovenia, no. 12/1996) and its revisions, art. 40

Description:

Investment
Privately funded elementary schools may be founded by
Slovenian natural or legal persons only.
The service supplier must establish a registered office or branch
office.

Sector:

Health and social services

Sub-Sector:

Human health services

Industry Classification:

CPC 931

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law of Health Services, Official Gazette of the RS, No. 23/2005,
arts. 1,3, 62-64
Infertility Treatment and Procedures of the BiomedicallyAssisted Procreation Act, Official Gazette of the RS, No.: 70/00,
arts. 15 and 16

Description:

Investment
A state monopoly is reserved for the following services:
Supply of blood, blood preparations, removal and preservation of
human organs for transplant, sociomedical, hygiene,
epidemiological and health-ecological services, patho1165

anatomical services, and biomedically-assisted procreation.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Pension and Disability Insurance Act (Official Gazette no.
109/2006), art. 306

Description:

Financial Services
A pension scheme may be provided by a mutual pension fund
(which is not a legal entity and is therefore managed by an
insurance company, a bank or a pension company), a pension
company or an insurance company. Additionally a pension
scheme can also be offered by pension scheme providers
established in accordance with the regulations applicable in a
Member State of the EU.

Sector:

Energy services

Sub-Sector:

Pipeline transportation of fuels
Storage and warehouse of fuels transported through pipelines

Industry Classification:

CPC 7131, part of CPC 742

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Energetski zakon (Energetic Act), Official Gazette RS, No
27/07- consolidated text, 70/80, 22/2010

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
A licence is required to perform the production, trading and
distribution of liquid fuels, processing of oil and petroleum
products, transmission and distribution of energy and fuels
through networks, storing of gaseous, liquid and solid fuels,
1166

supply of electricity, gas or heat, operation of electricity or
natural gas market, and representation and intermediation in
electricity and natural gas markets.
These activities are subject to registration, which is conditioned
on establishment in Slovenia.

Sector:

Fishing
Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Article 210 of the Maritime Code

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

Seagoing non-merchant ships may be registered to fly the
Slovenian flag if:
(a) more than half of the ship is owned by citizens of the
Republic of Slovenia, nationals of a Member State of the EU or
by juridical persons having their headquarters in Slovenia or a
Member State of the EU; or
(b) more than half of the ship is owned by a non- national of a
Member State of the EU and the ship operator qualifies as one of
the persons described in the previous paragraph, with the consent
of the owner of the ship
If the owner or co-owner is not a citizen of Slovenia or a
1167

juridical person having their headquarters in Slovenia, an
authorised representative needs to be appointed to accept the
service of judicial and administrative writs, prior to registering
the ship. The authorisation must be communicated to the
competent authority, responsible for keeping the register.
Nuclear ships cannot be registered.
***

1168

Reservations applicable in Spain
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Royal Decree 664/1999 of 23 April 1999 relating to foreign
investment

Description:

Investment
Foreign investment in activities directly relating to real estate
investments for diplomatic missions by States that are not
members of the EU require an administrative authorisation from
the Spanish Council of Ministers, unless there is a reciprocal
liberalisation agreement in place.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Estatuto General de la Abogacía Española, aprobado por Real
Decreto 658/2001, art. 13.1ª

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Full admission to the Bar is required for the practice of legal
services in respect of EU law and the law of a Member State of
the EU, including representation before courts.
Only nationals of a Member State of the EEA or of the Swiss
Confederation may be admitted to the Bar, and are thus entitled

1169

to provide legal services in respect of domestic law.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of a
Member State of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. Some types of legal form may
be reserved exclusively to lawyers admitted to the Bar, also on a
non-discriminatory basis.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Real Decreto Legislativo 1/2011 de 1 de julio por el que se
aprueba el texto refundido de la Ley de Auditoria de Cuentas,
arts. 8.1, 8.2.c, 9.2, 9.3,10.1

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Statutory auditors are subject to a nationality of a Member State
of the EU condition. This reservation does not apply to the
auditing of non-EU companies listed in a Spanish regulated
market.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Intellectual property attorney

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Ley 11/1986, de 20 de marzo, de Patentes de Invención y
Modelos de utilidad, arts. 155-157

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services

1170

Industrial property attorneys are subject to a nationality of a
Member State of the EU condition.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Real Decreto 1840/2000. Estatutos Generales de la Organización
Colegial Veterinaria Española (Statute of the Veterinary
Association of Spain), arts. 62, 64

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Membership in a professional association is obligatory and
subject to a nationality of a Member State of the EU condition,
which may be waived through a bilateral professional agreement.

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of tobacco

Industry Classification:

CPC 63108

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Ley 13/1998 de 4 de Mayo de Ordenación del Mercado de
Tabacos y Normativa Tributaria, art. 4

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
State monopoly on retail sales of tobacco. Establishment is subject
to a nationality of a Member State of the EU condition.

1171

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Description:

Ley 16/1997, de 25 de abril, de regulación de servicios de las
oficinas de farmacia (Law 16/1997, of 25 April, regulating
services in pharmacies), arts. 2, 3.1
Investment
Only natural persons are permitted to provide retail services of
pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to the public.
Establishment authorisation is subject to an economic needs test.
Main criteria: density conditions in the area.

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Ley Orgánica 6/2001, de 21 de Diciembre, de Universidades.
(Law 6 / 2001 of 21 December, on Universities), art. 4

Description:

Investment
An authorisation is required in order to open a privately funded
university which issues recognised diplomas or degrees; the
procedure involves obtaining the advice of the Parliament. An
economic needs test is applied, main criteria are population size
and density of existing establishments.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

1172

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Real Decreto Legislativo 6/2004, de 29 de octubre, por el que
se aprueba el texto refundido de la Ley de ordenación y
supervisión de los seguros privados (Law on regulation and
supervision of private insurance)

Description:

Financial Services
Before establishing a branch or agency in Spain in order to
provide certain classes of insurance, a foreign insurer must have
been authorised to operate in the same classes of insurance in its
country of origin for at least five years.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Tourist guides services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Regional (Sub-federal)

Measures:

Andalucía
Decreto 80/2010, de 30 de marzo, de simplificación de
trámites administrativos y de modificación de diversos
Decretos para su adaptación al Decreto-ley 3/2009, de 22 de
diciembre, por el que se modifican diversas Leyes para la
transposición en Andalucía de la Directiva relativa a los
Servicios en el Mercado Interior, art 3.5
Aragón
Decreto 264/2007, de 23 de octubre, del Gobierno de Aragón,
por el que se aprueba el Reglamento de Guías de Turismo, art.
13
Cantabria
Decreto 51/2001, de 24 de julio, art. 4, por el que se modifica el

1173

Decreto 32/1997, de 25 de abril, por el que se aprueba el
reglamento para el ejercicio de actividades turístico-informativas
privadas
Castilla y León
Decreto 25/2000, de 10 de febrero, por el que se modifica el
Decreto 101/1995, de 25 de mayo, por el que se regula la
profesión de guía de turismo de la Comunidad Autónoma de
Castilla y León.
Castilla la Mancha
Decreto 96/2006 , de 17 de julio, de Ordenación de las
Profesiones Turísticas.
Cataluña
Decreto Legislativo 3/2010, de 5 de octubre, para la adecuación
de normas con rango de ley a la Directiva 2006/123/CE, del
Parlamento y del Consejo, de 12 de diciembre de 2006, relativa a
los servicios en el mercado interior, art. 88.
Comunidad de Madrid
Decreto 84/2006, de 26 de octubre del Consejo de Gobierno, por
el que se modifica el Decreto 47/1996, de 28 de Marzo.
Comunidad Valenciana
Decreto 90/2010, de 21 de mayo, del Consell, por el que se
modifica el reglamento regulador de la profesión de guía de
turismo en el ámbito territorial de la Comunitat Valenciana,
aprobado por el Decreto 62/1996, de 25 de marzo, del Consell.
Extremadura
Decreto 43/2000, de 22 de febrero, por el que se modifica el
Decreto 12/1996, de 6 de febrero, por el que se aprueba el
reglamento de la actividad profesional de Guía Turístico
Galicia
Decreto 42/2001, de 1 de febrero, de Refundición en materia de
agencias de viajes, guias de turismo y turismo activo.
Illes Balears
Decreto 136/2000, de 22 de septiembre, por el cual se modifica
el Decreto 112/1996, de 21 de junio, por el que se regula la
1174

habilitación de guía turístico en las Islas Baleares.
Islas Canarias
Decreto 13/2010, de 11 de febrero, por el que se regula el
acceso y ejercicio de la profesión de guía de turismo en la
Comunidad Autónoma de Canarias, art 5
La Rioja
Decreto 20/2000, de 28 de abril, de modificación del Decreto
27/1997, de 30 de abril, por el que se aprueba el Reglamento
regulador de la profesión de Guías de Turismo.
Navarra
Decreto 125/95, de 20 de mayo, por el que se regula la profesión
de guias de turismo en Navarra.
Principado de Asturias
Decreto 59/2007, de 24 de mayo, por el que se aprueba el
Reglamento regulador de la profesión de Guía de Turismo en el
Principado de Asturias.
Región de Murcia
Decreto n.º 37/2011, de 8 de abril, por el que se modifican
diversos decretos en materia de turismo para su adaptación a la
ley 11/1997, de 12 de diciembre, de turismo de la Región de
Murcia tras su modificación por la ley 12/2009, de 11 de
diciembre, por la que se modifican diversas leyes para su
adaptación a la directiva 2006/123/CE, del Parlamento Europeo
y del Consejo de 12 de diciembre de 2006, relativa a los
servicios en el mercado interior (los guías podrían ser extranjeros
si tienen homologación de las titulaciones requeridas)
Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nationality of a Member State of the EU condition for the
provision of tourist guide services.

Sector:

Fishing, transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services

1175

Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.10502, CPC 5133, CPC5223, CPC
721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Law of Ports and Maritime Shipping(Royal Legislative Decree
2/2011) Articles 251, 252, 253, and Additional Disposition 16 th
indent 4.a) as well as Article 6, in Royal Decree 1516/2007 on
the legal regime of cabotage and maritime navigation of public
interest

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
In order to register a ship on the national register of Spain and to
fly the national flag, the owner of that ship or the person who has
exclusive possession of that ship must be Spanish or established
in Spain or incorporated in other Member State of the EU.
To register a ship in the Especial Register Islands, the owner
company must be established in the Canary Islands.
***

1176

Reservations applicable in Sweden
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lag om utländska filialer m.m (Foreign Branch Offices Act)
(1992:160)
Aktiebolagslagen (Companies Act) (2005:551),
The Co-operative Economic Associations Act (1987:667)
Act on European Economic Interest Groupings (1994:1927)

Description:

Investment
A foreign company, which has not established a legal entity
in Sweden or is conducting its business through a commercial
agent, shall conduct its commercial operations through a
branch, registered in Sweden, with independent management
and separate accounts. The managing director and the vicemanaging director, if appointed, of the branch, must reside in the
EEA. A natural person not resident in the EEA, who conducts
commercial operations in Sweden, shall appoint and register a
resident representative responsible for the operations in Sweden.
Separate accounts shall be kept for the operations in Sweden.
The competent authority may in individual cases grant
exemptions from the branch and residency requirements.
Building projects with duration of less than a year - conducted
by a company located or a natural person residing outside the
EEA - are exempted from the requirements of establishing a
branch or appointing a resident representative.
A Swedish limited liability company may be established by a
natural person resident within the EEA, by a Swedish legal
person or by a legal person that has been formed according to the
legislation in a state within the EEA and that has its registered
office, head quarters or principal place of business within the
EEA. A partnership may be a founder, only if all owners with
unlimited personal liability are resident within the EEA.
Founders outside the EEA may apply for permission from the
1177

competent authority.
For limited liability companies and co-operative economic
associations, at least 50 per cent of the members of the board of
directors, at least 50 per cent of the deputy board members, the
managing director, the vice-managing director, and at least one
of the persons authorised to sign for the company, if any, must
reside within the EEA. The competent authority may grant
exemptions from this requirement. If none of the company’s or
society’s representatives reside in Sweden, the board must
appoint and register a person resident in Sweden, who has been
authorised to receive servings on behalf of the company or
society.
Corresponding conditions prevail for establishment of all other
types of legal entities.

Sector:

Animal husbandry

Sub-Sector:

Reindeer husbandry

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 014

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Reindeer Husbandry Act (1971:437), para. 1

Description:

Investment
Only Sami people may own and practice reindeer husbandry.

Sector:

Fishing and aquaculture

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

1178

Measures:

Maritime Law (1994:1009)
Fisheries Act (1993:787)
Ordinance for fishing, aquaculture and the fishing industry
(1994:1716)
The Fishing Regulations of the National Board of Fisheries
(2004:25)
The Ship Security Regulation (2003:438)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Professional fishing is fishing with a professional fishing licence
or fishing by foreign fishermen holding a specific permit to fish
professionally in Swedish territorial waters or in the Swedish
economic zone.
A professional fishing licence may be given to a fisherman for
whom fishing is essential to his living and where the fishing has
a connection to the Swedish fishing industry. A connection to
Swedish fishing industry could for example be demonstrated if
the fishermen lands half his catch during a calendar year (in
value) in Sweden, if half the fishing trips depart from a Swedish
harbour or half of the fishermen in the fleet are domiciled in
Sweden.
For vessels over five meters, a vessel permit is needed together
with the professional fishing licence. A permit is granted if,
among other things, the vessel is registered in the national
registry, the vessel has a real economic connection to Sweden,
the permit holder is a fisherman with a professional fishing
licence and if the commander of the vessel is a fisherman with a
professional fishing licence.
The commander of a fishing vessel over 20 gross tonnages shall
be a national of a Member State of the EEA. Exemptions may be
granted by the Swedish Transport Agency.
A ship shall be deemed Swedish and can carry the Swedish flag
if more than half is owned by Swedish citizens or juridical
persons. The Government may permit foreign vessels to fly the
Swedish flag where their operations are under Swedish control
or the owner can demonstrate that he has his permanent
residence in Sweden. Vessels which are 50 per cent owned by
nationals of a Member State of the EEA or companies having
their registered office, central administration or principal place of
business in the EEA and whose operation is controlled from
Sweden, may also be registered in the Swedish register.

1179

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Rättegångsbalken (The Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure)
(1942:740)
The Swedish Bar Association Code of Conduct adopted 29
August 2008

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For admission to the Bar, which is required only for the use of
the Swedish title “advokat”, residency within the EU, EEA orthe
Swiss Confederation is required. Exemptions may be granted by
the board of the Swedish Bar Association. Admission to the Bar
is not necessary for the practice of domestic law.
A member of the Swedish Bar Association may not be employed
by anyone other than a Bar member or a company conducting
the business of a Bar member. However, a member of the Bar
may be employed by a foreign company conducting the business
of an advocate, provided that the company in question is
domiciled in a country within the EU, the EEA or the Swiss
Confederation.
Members conducting their practice in the form of a company or a
partnership may not have any other objective and may not carry
out any other business than the practice of an advocate.
Collaboration with other advocate businesses is permitted,
however, collaboration with foreign businesses requires
permission by the Board of the Bar Association.
Only a Member may directly or indirectly, or through a
company, practice as an advocate, own shares in the company or
be a partner. Only a Member may be a member or deputy
member of the board or deputy managing director, or an
authorised signatory or secretary of the company or the
partnership.

1180

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Revisorslagen (Auditors Act) (2001:883)
Revisionslag (Auditing Act) (1999:1079)
Aktiebolagslagen (Companies Act) (2005:551)
Lag om ekonomiska föreningar (The Co-operative Economic
Associations Act) (1987:667)
Others, regulating the requirements to make use of approved
auditors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only auditors approved in Sweden, authorised auditors and
registered auditing firms may perform statutory auditing services
in certain legal entities, including in all limited companies, as
well as natural persons.
Only auditors approved in Sweden, and registered public
accounting firms, may be shareholders or form partnerships in
companies which practice qualified auditing (for official
purposes).
Residency within the EEA orthe Swiss Confederation is required
for approval.
The titles of “approved auditor” and “authorised auditor” may
only be used by auditors approved or authorised in Sweden.
Auditors of co-operative economic associations and certain other
enterprises who are not certified or approved accountants must
be resident within the EEA, unless the Government, or a
Government authority appointed by the Government, in a
particular case allows otherwise.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Rental or leasing of vehicles without operators

1181

Industry Classification:

CPC 831

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Central

Measures:

Lag (1998:424) om biluthyrning (Act on renting and leasing
cars)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Suppliers of rental or leasing services of cars and certain off-road
vehicles (terrängmotorfordon) without a driver, rented or leased
for a period of less than one year, are obliged to appoint
someone to be responsible for ensuring, among other things, that
the business is conducted in accordance with applicable rules
and regulations and that the road traffic safety rules are followed.
The responsible person must reside in Sweden.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Rental or leasing services without operators
Rental or leasing of ships

Industry Classification:

CPC 83103

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Sjölagen (Maritime Law) (1994:1009), Chapter 1, § 1

Description:

Investment
To fly the Swedish flag, proof of dominating Swedish operating
influence must be shown in case of foreign ownership interests
in ships. Dominating Swedish influence means a proportionally
large share of Swedish ownership in the ship, and that the
operation of the ship is located in Sweden.
Foreign ships may be granted an exemption from this rule where
they are rented or leased by Swedish legal persons through
bareboat charter contracts. To be granted an exemption, the
bareboat charter contract must be provided to the Swedish
Maritime Administration and demonstrate that the charterer
takes full responsibility for operation and crew of the leased or

1182

rented ship. The duration of the contract should be at least one to
two years.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Other business services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87909

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Cooperative building societies law (1991:614)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The economic plan for a building society must be certified by
two persons. These persons must be publicly approved by
authorities in the EEA.

Sector:

Other business services n.e.c.

Sub-Sector:

Pawn-shops

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 87909

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:
Description:

PAWN SHOP ACT (1995:1000)
Investment
Pawn-shops must be established as a limited liability company or
as a branch.

Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Retailing services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 631, part of CPC 6322

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1183

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Alcohol Act (2010:1622)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Systembolaget AB has a governmental monopoly on retail sales
of liquor, wine and beer (except non-alcoholic beer). Alcoholic
beverages are beverages with an alcohol content over 2.25
percentage per volume. For beer, the limit is an alcohol content
over 3.5 percentage per volume.

Sector:

Printing and publishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 22, CPC 88442

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:
The Freedom of the Press Act (1949:105)
Fundamental law on Freedom of Expression (1991:1469)
Act on ordinances for the Freedom of the Press Act and the
Fundamental law on Freedom of Expression (1991:1559)
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Natural persons who are owners of periodicals that are printed
and published in Sweden must reside in Sweden or be nationals
of a Member State of the EEA. Owners of such periodicals who
are juridical persons must be established in the EEA.
Periodicals that are printed and published in Sweden, and
technical recordings must have a responsible editor, who must be
domiciled in Sweden.

Sector:

Environmental services

Sub-Sector:

Protection of ambient air and climate

Industry Classification:

CPC 9404

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1184

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Vehicles Act (2002:574)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Only entities established in Sweden or having their principal seat
in Sweden are eligible for accreditation to perform control
services of exhaust gas.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Lag om försäkringsförmedling (Insurance Mediation Act)
(2005:405), Chapter 3, § 2

Description:

Financial Services
Insurance mediation undertakings not incorporated in Sweden
may establish only through a branch.

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Foreign Insurers Business in Sweden Act (1998:293)

Description:

Financial Services
The supply of direct insurance is allowed only through an
insurance service supplier authorised in Sweden, provided that
the foreign service supplier and the Swedish insurance company
belong to the same group of companies or have an agreement of

1185

cooperation between them.

Sector:

Financial Services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Sparbankslagen (Savings Bank Act) (1987:619), Chapter 2, § 1,
part 2

Description:

Financial Services
A founder of a savings bank shall be a natural person resident in
a Member State of the EEA.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship
other than fishing and aquaculture, but including transport
services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

CPC 5133, CPC5223, CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC
74590

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:
Measures:

National
Maritime Act (1994:1009), Ship safety Ordinance (1994:1009)
The Ship Security Regulation (2003:438)

1186

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in
International Maritime Transport Services

Services,

and

A ship shall be deemed Swedish and may carry the Swedish flag
if more than half the equity is owned by Swedish citizens or
juridical persons. The Government may permit foreign vessels to
fly the Swedish flag where their operations are under Swedish
control or the owner can demonstrate that he has his permanent
residence in Sweden.
Vessels which are 50 per cent or more owned by nationals of a
Member State of the EEA or companies having their registered
office, central administration or principal place of business in the
EEA and whose operation is controlled from Sweden, may also
be registered in the Swedish register.
The commander of a trading vessel or a traditional vessel shall
be a national of a Member State of the EEA. Exemptions may be
granted by the Swedish Transport Agency.
A separate Swedish reservation applies to vessels used for
fishing and aquaculture.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Rail transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7111

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Järnvägslagen (Rail road Act) (2004:519), Chapter 5, Section 2c

Description:

Investment
Picking up and setting down passengers on the line between
Stockholm City and Arlanda Airport (where Arlanda is the
starting or final destination of the journey) is limited to one
operator. The operator for the line between Arlanda and
Stockholm may allow other operators to use their line. This
reservation does not apply to transport of passengers between
Arlanda and other destinations than Stockholm.

Sector:

Transport

1187

Sub-Sector:

Operators of road haulage and road passenger transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Yrkestrafiklag (2012:210) (Act on professional traffic)
Lag om vägtrafikregister (2001:558) (Act on road traffic
registry)
Yrkestrafikförordning (2012:237) (Government regulation on
professional traffic)
Taxitrafiklag (2012:211) (Act on Taxis)
Taxitrafikförordning (2012:238) (Government regulation on
taxis)

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
In order to engage in the occupation of road transport operator, a
Swedish licence is needed. Criteria for receiving a taxi licence
include that the company has appointed a natural person to act as
the transport manager (a de facto residency requirement – see the
Swedish reservation on types of establishment).
Criteria for receiving a licence for other road transport operators
require that the company be established in the EU, have an
establishment situated in Sweden and have appointed a natural
person to act as the transport manager, who must be resident in
the EU.
Licences are granted on non-discriminatory terms, except that
operators of road haulage and road passenger transport services
may as a general rule only use vehicles that are registered in the
national road traffic registry. If a vehicle is registered abroad,
owned by a natural or legal person whose principal residence is
abroad and is brought to Sweden for temporary use, the vehicle
may be temporarily used in Sweden. Temporary use is usually
defined by the Swedish Transport Agency as meaning not more
than one year.
Operators of cross-border road haulage and road passenger
transport services abroad need to be licensed for such operations
1188

by the competent authority in the country where they are
established. Additional requirements for cross-border trade may
be regulated in bilateral road transport agreements. For vehicles
where no such bilateral agreement is applicable, a licence is also
needed from the Swedish Transport Agency.
***

1189

Reservations applicable in the United Kingdom
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Regional

Measures:

For England and Wales, the Solicitors Act 1974, the
Administration of Justice Act 1985 and the Legal Services Act
2007
For Scotland, the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 and the Legal
Services (Scotland) Act 2010
For Northern Ireland, the Solicitors (Northern Ireland) Order
1976
In addition, the measures applicable in each jurisdiction include
any requirements set by professional and regulatory bodies.

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Residency (commercial presence) may be required for the
provision of some UK domestic legal services by the relevant
professional or regulatory body.
To provide legal services in respect of EU law and the law of
Member States of the EU, commercial presence may be required
to take one of the legal forms which are allowed under national
law on a non-discriminatory basis. In addition, national law may
include non-discriminatory requirements as to the organisation
of the permitted legal forms.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

1190

Measures:

Veterinary Surgeons Act (1966)

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Access through partnership or natural persons only.
Physical presence is required to perform veterinary surgery. It is
a criminal act under the Veterinary Surgeons Act for anyone in
the UK who is not a veterinary surgeon (and a member,
therefore, of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS))
to perform veterinary surgery.

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas, services
incidental to mining, related scientific and technical consulting
services

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 11, CPC 883, CPC 8675

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Petroleum Act 1988

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A licence is necessary to undertake exploration and production
activities on the UK Continental Shelf (UKCS), and to provide
services which require direct access to or exploitation of natural
resources.
This reservation applies to production licences issued with
respect to the UK Continental Shelf. To be a Licensee, a
company must have a place of business within the UK. That
means either: (a) a staffed presence in the UK; (b) registration
of a UK company at Enterprises House; or (c) registration of a
UK branch of a foreign company at Enterprises House. This
requirement exists for any company applying for a new licence
and for any company seeking to join an existing licence by
assignment. It applies to all licences and to all enterprises,
whether operator or not.
To be a party to a Licence that covers a producing field, a
company must: (a) be registered at Enterprises House as a UK
company; or (b) carry on its business through a fixed place of
business in the UK as defined in section 148 of the Finance Act
2003 (which normally requires a staffed presence).
1191

Fishing

Sector:

Transport
Sub-Sector:

All commercial marine activity undertaken from a seagoing ship,
including fishing, aquaculture, and services incidental to fishing
Transport services (passengers and freight) by seagoing vessels
Pilotage and berthing services
Vessel salvage and refloating services
Other supporting services for water transport
Construction for waterways, harbours, dams and other water
works

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC5223,
CPC 721, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

The Merchant Shipping (Registration of Ships) Regulations 1993
and the Merchant Shipping Act 1995

Description:

Investment and International Maritime Transport Services
In order to register a UK flagged vessel, a majority interest in the
vessel must be owned by qualified persons. Such qualified
persons may include, but are not limited to: British citizens
resident in the UK; British citizens not resident in the UK where
a representative person domiciled in the UK is appointed; and
those UK and EEA incorporated companies with a UK place of
business or a nominated representative in the UK.
ANNEX II
Headnote
Reservations for future measures

1.

The Schedule of a Party to this Annex sets out, under Articles 8.14 (Reservations and
exceptions), 9.7 (Reservations), 14.4 (Reservations), and, for the European Union,
Article 13.10 (Reservations and exceptions), the reservations taken by that Party with
respect to specific sectors, sub-sectors or activities for which it may maintain
existing, or adopt new or more restrictive, measures that do not conform with
obligations imposed by:

1192

(a)

Articles 8.6 (National treatment), 9.3 (National treatment) or, for the European
Union, Article 13.3 (National treatment);

(b)

Articles 8.7 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 9.5 (Most-Favoured-nation
treatment) or, for the European Union, Article 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation
treatment);

(c)

Articles 8.4 (Market access), 9.6 (Market access) or, for the European Union,
Article 13.6 (Market access);

(d)

Article 8.5 (Performance requirements);

(e)

Article 8.8 (Senior management and boards of directors) or, for the European
Union, Article 13.8 (Senior management and boards of directors);

(f)

for the European Union, Article 13.7 (Cross-border supply of financial
services); or

(g)

Article 14.4 (Obligations).

2.

The reservations of a Party are without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the
Parties under the GATS.

3.

Each reservation sets out the following elements:
(a)

Sector refers to the general sector in which the reservation is taken;

(b)

Sub-Sector refers to the specific sector in which the reservation is taken;

(c)

Industry Classification refers, where applicable, to the activity covered by the
reservation according to the CPC, ISIC rev 3.1, or as expressly otherwise
described in a Party’s reservation;

(d)

Type of Reservation specifies the obligation referred to in paragraph 1 for
which a reservation is taken;

(e)

Description sets out the scope of the sector, sub-sector or activities covered by
the reservation; and

(g)

Existing Measures identifies, for transparency purposes, existing measures
that apply to the sector, sub-sector or activities covered by the reservation.

4.

In interpreting a reservation, all elements of the reservation shall be considered. The
Description element shall prevail over all other elements.

5.

A reservation taken at the level of the European Union applies to a measure of a
Member State of the European Union at the national level as well as a measure of a
government within a Member State of the European Union, unless the reservation
excludes a Member State of the European Union. A reservation taken by Canada at
the national level of government or by a Member State of the European Union
applies to a measure of a government at the regional, provincial, territorial or local
level within that country.

6.

Where a Party maintains a measure that requires that a service supplier be a natural
person, citizen, permanent resident or resident of its territory as a condition to the
supply of a service in its territory, a reservation for that measure taken with respect to
cross-border trade in services shall operate as a reservation with respect to
investment, to the extent of that measure.
1193

7.

A reservation for a measure that requires a service supplier be a natural person,
citizen, permanent resident, or resident of its territory as a condition to the supply of
a financial service in its territory taken with respect to Article 13.7 (Cross-border
supply of financial services) shall operate as a reservation with respect to Articles
13.3 (National treatment), 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 13.6 (Market
access), and 13.8 (Senior management and boards of directors), to the extent of that
measure.

8.

For the purposes of this Annex including each Party’s Schedule to this Annex:
ISIC rev 3.1 means the International Standard Industrial Classification of all
Economic Activities as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical
Papers, Series M, N° 4, ISIC rev 3.1, 2002.

9.

The following abbreviations are used in the European Union’s Schedule to this
Annex:
AT

Austria

BE

Belgium

BG Bulgaria
CY Cyprus
CZ

Czech Republic

DE

Germany

DK Denmark
EU

European Union, including all its Member States

ES

Spain

EE

Estonia

FI

Finland

FR

France

EL

Greece

HR Croatia
HU Hungary
IE

Ireland

IT

Italy

LV

Latvia

LT

Lithuania

LU

Luxembourg

MT Malta
NL

Netherlands

PL

Poland

1194

PT

Portugal

RO Romania
SK

Slovakia

SI

Slovenia

SE

Sweden

UK United Kingdom

1195

Schedule of Canada
Reservations applicable in Canada
(applicable in all Provinces and Territories)
Reservation II-C-1
Sector:

Aboriginal affairs

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
denying investors of the European Union and their investments,
or service suppliers of the European Union, rights or preferences
provided to aboriginal peoples.

Existing Measures:

Constitution Act, 1982, being Schedule B to the Canada Act
1982 (U.K.), 1982, c. 11

1196

Reservation II-C-2
Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure related
to collective marketing arrangements for agricultural goods
which includes activities such as production, pricing, buying,
selling or any other activity to prepare the product in a form, or
make it available at a place or time, for purchase for
consumption or use.

Existing Measures:

1197

Reservation II-C-3
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
1.
British Columbia, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia,
Nunavut, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, The Northwest
Territories, and Yukon, reserve the right to adopt or maintain a
measure relating to an enterprise of Canada that is a covered
investment that requires 25 per cent or less of the board of
directors, or any committee thereof, be of a particular nationality.
An amendment to a measure referred to above must not decrease
the conformity of the measure, as it existed immediately before
the amendment, with the obligations set out in Chapter Eight
(Investment).
2.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
requiring that up to 50 per cent of the board of directors of an
enterprise that is a covered investment be ordinarily resident in
Canada. A granting of residency to a national of the European
Union who is an appointee to a board of directors of an
enterprise that is a covered investment will be conducted in
accordance with Canadian law relating to the entry of foreign
nationals. However, a national of the European Union shall not
be subject to an economic needs test solely for the purpose of the
appointment to the board of directors.

Existing Measures:

1198

Reservation II-C-4
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure relating
to residency requirements for the ownership of oceanfront land
by investors of the European Union or their investments.

Existing Measures:

1199

Reservation II-C-5
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fishing and services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
with respect to collective marketing and trading arrangements for
fish and seafood products, and licencing fishing or fishing
related activities, including entry of foreign fishing vessels to
Canada’s exclusive economic zone, territorial sea, internal
waters or ports, and use of any services therein.
2.
Canada shall endeavour to accord to vessels entitled to
fly the flag of a Member State of the European Union treatment
no less favourable than the treatment it accords, in like
situations, to vessels entitled to fly the flag of any other foreign
State.

Existing Measures:

Fisheries Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14
Coastal Fisheries Protection Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-33
Coastal Fisheries Protection Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 413
Commercial Fisheries Licensing Policy
Policy on Foreign Investment in the Canadian Fisheries Sector,
1985
Freshwater Fish Marketing Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-13

1200

Reservation II-C-6
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Services related to security markets

Industry Classification:

CPC 8132

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure relating
to the acquisition, sale or other disposition by nationals of the
European Union of bonds, treasury bills or other kinds of debt
securities issued by the Government of Canada or a Canadian
sub-national government.

Existing Measures:

Financial Administration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11

1201

Reservation II-C-7
Sector:

Food, beverage and drug industries

Sub-Sector:

Liquor, wine and beer stores

Industry Classification:

CPC 241, 242, 243, 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act gives each
provincial government an import monopoly on intoxicating
liquors entering its territory.

Existing Measures:

Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-3

1202

Reservation II-C-8
Sector:

Minority affairs

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
conferring rights or privileges to a socially or economically
disadvantaged minority.

Existing Measures:

1203

Reservation II-C-9
Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure with
respect to the supply of public law enforcement and correctional
services, as well as the following services to the extent that they
are social services established or maintained for a public
purpose: income security or insurance, social security or
insurance, social welfare, public education, public training,
health, and child care.

Existing Measures:

1204

Reservation II-C-10
Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
with respect to the supply of social services not otherwise
reserved under its Reservation II-C-9 in respect of social
services.
2.
This reservation shall not extend to the adoption of a new
measure imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in the supply of such social services.

Existing Measures:

1205

Reservation II-C-11
Sector:

Collection, purification and distribution of water

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure with
respect to the collection, purification and distribution of water.

Existing Measures:

1206

Reservation II-C-12
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transportation services via pipeline

Industry Classification:

CPC 713

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure with
respect to the issuance of certificates for the pipeline
transportation of fuels.

Existing Measures:

National Energy Board Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-7

1207

Reservation II-C-13
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Selling and marketing of air transport services, as defined in
Articles 8.1 (Definitions) and 9.1 (Definitions)

Industry Classification:

Defined in Articles 8.1 (Definitions) and 9.1 (Definitions)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
relating to the selling and marketing of air transport services.
2.
For greater certainty, this reservation does not affect
Canada’s rights and obligations under the Agreement on Air
Transport Between Canada and the European Community and
its Member States, done at Brussels on 17 December 2009 and
Ottawa on 18 December 2009.

Existing Measures:

1208

Reservation II-C-14
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Construction work for waterways, harbours, dams and other
water works transportation services by sea-going or non-seagoing vessels
Supporting and other services for water transport
Any other marine activity of a commercial nature undertaken by
or from a vessel as set out in the Description element below

Industry Classification:

CPC 5133, 5223, 721, 722, 745, any other marine activity of a
commercial nature undertaken by or from a vessel

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors
Obligations

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in Services, and
International Maritime Transport Services
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
affecting the investment in or supply of marine cabotage
services, including:
(a)
the transportation of goods or passengers by vessel
between points in the territory of Canada or above the
continental shelf of Canada, directly or by way of a place outside
Canada; but with respect to waters above the continental shelf of
Canada, the transportation of goods or passengers only in
relation to the exploration, exploitation or transportation of the
mineral or non-living natural resources of the continental shelf of
Canada; and
(b)
the engaging by vessel in any other marine activity of a
commercial nature in the territory of Canada and, with respect to
waters above the continental shelf, in such other marine activities
of a commercial nature that are in relation to the exploration,
exploitation or transportation of the mineral or non-living natural
resources of the continental shelf of Canada.
2.
This reservation relates to, among other things,
limitations and conditions for services suppliers entitled to
participate in these activities, to criteria for the issuance of a
temporary cabotage licence to foreign vessels, and to limits on
the number of cabotage licences issued to foreign vessels.
3.

For greater certainty, this reservation applies, among
1209

other things, to marine activities of a commercial nature
undertaken by or from a vessel, including feeder services and
repositioning of empty containers.
4.
This reservation does not apply to a measure relating to
the investment in or the supply of the following marine cabotage
services undertaken from a vessel operated by an enterprise of
the European Union, or a vessel operated by an enterprise of a
third country79 owned or controlled by a national of the
European Union if that vessel is registered in accordance with
the laws of a Member State of the European Union and is flying
the flag of a Member State of the European Union:
(a)
repositioning owned or leased empty containers on a nonrevenue basis;
(b)
(i) continuous pre or onward transport of international
cargo between the Port of Halifax and the Port of Montreal, and
between the Port of Montreal and the Port of Halifax, using
vessels registered on the first (national) registries referred to in
paragraph 1 of the Annex to Commission communication
C(2004) 43 – Community guidelines on State Aid to maritime
transport; and
(ii) pre or onward transport of international containerised
cargo between the Port of Halifax and the Port of Montreal, and
between the Port of Montreal and the Port of Halifax, as a single
voyage concurrent to an international leg, using vessels
registered on the first (national) or second (international)
registries referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, and 4 of the Annex to
Commission communication C(2004) 42 – Community
guidelines on State Aid to maritime transport; or
(c) dredging.
Existing Measures:

79

Coasting Trade Act, S.C. 1992, c. 31
Canada Shipping Act, 2001, S.C. 2001, c. 26
Customs Act, R.S.C. 1985 (2d Supp.), c. 1
Customs and Excise Offshore Application Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C53

Canada reserves the right to not extend these benefits to enterprises of the United States of America.

1210

Reservation II-C-15
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transport services by sea-going or non-sea-going vessels
Supporting services for water transport
Any other marine activity of a commercial nature undertaken
from a vessel in waters of mutual interest

Industry Classification:

CPC 721, 722, 745, any other marine activity of a commercial
nature undertaken from a vessel

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment
Obligations

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services and International Maritime
Transport Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure relating
to the implementation of agreements, arrangements and other
formal or informal undertakings with other countries with
respect to maritime activities in waters of mutual interest in areas
such as pollution control (including double hull requirements for
oil tankers), safe navigation, barge inspection standards, water
quality, pilotage, salvage, drug abuse control and maritime
communications.

Existing Measures:

1211

Reservation II-C-16
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 07

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure relating
to the number or type of legal entity which manages or operates
transportation infrastructure owned or controlled by Canada.

Existing Measures:

1212

Reservation II-C-17
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

All transportation sub-sectors, other than the following subsectors:
Maritime container station and depot services
Maritime agency services
Maritime freight forwarding services
Aircraft repair and maintenance services
Computer reservation systems
Passenger and freight transportation by railway
Maintenance and repair of rail transport equipment
Repair services n.e.c. of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, on a fee or contract basis
Maintenance and repair services of motor vehicles
Maintenance and repair services of motorcycles and
snowmobiles
Cargo handling services for land transport
Storage and warehousing services for land transport
Freight transport agency services for land transport
Other supporting and auxiliary transport services for land
transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 07, CPC 51, CPC 61, CPC 886 and any other commercial
activity undertaken from, or with respect to a vessel, aircraft,
motor vehicle or rail transport equipment, other than:
CPC 6112
CPC 6122
CPC 7111
CPC 7112
CPC 741 (limited to land transport services)
CPC 742 (limited to land transport services)
CPC 7480 (limited to land transport services)
CPC 7490 (limited to land transport services)
CPC 8867
CPC 8868 (limited to rail transport equipment)
Computer reservation system services as defined in Articles 8.1
(Definitions) and 9.1 (Definitions)
Aircraft repair and maintenance services as defined Articles 8.1
(Definitions) and Article 9.1 (Definitions)
Maritime container station and depot services, maritime agency
services, maritime freight forwarding services as defined in
Article 14.1 (Definitions)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Obligations

Description:

Investment, Cross-Border Trade in Services, and

1213

International Maritime Transport Services
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure related
to the designation, establishment, expansion, or operation of
monopolies or exclusive service suppliers in the transportation
sector.
Existing Measures:

1214

Reservation II-C-18
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting and auxiliary transport services
Ground handling services as defined in Articles 8.1 (Definitions)
and 9.1 (Definitions)

Industry Classification:

CPC 74, ground handling services as defined in Articles
8.1 (Definitions) and 9.1 (Definitions)

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting the number of suppliers of certain supporting and
auxiliary transport services related to: the handling of
passengers, freight, cargo (including mail) and transportation
conveyances that support transportation carriers, at airports,
where physical or operational constraints arise primarily as a
result of safety or security considerations.
2.
For greater certainty, in the case of ground handling
services, this reservation does not affect Canada’s rights and
obligations under the Agreement on Air Transport Between
Canada and the European Community and its Member States,
done at Brussels on 17 December 2009 and Ottawa on 18
December 2009

Existing Measures:

1215

Reservation II-C-19
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Technical testing and analysis services

Industry Classification:

CPC 8676

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
affecting the statutory inspection and certification of vessels on
behalf of Canada.
2.
For greater certainty, only a person, classification society
or other organisation authorised by Canada may carry out
statutory inspections and issue Canadian Maritime Documents to
Canadian registered vessels and their equipment on behalf of
Canada.

Existing Measures:

1216

Reservation II-C-20
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment
1.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
that accords differential treatment under any bilateral or
multilateral international agreement in force or signed prior to
January 1, 1994.
2.
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
that accords differential treatment pursuant to an existing or
future bilateral or multilateral agreement relating to:
(a)

aviation;

(b)

fisheries; or

(c)

maritime matters, including salvage.

Existing Measures:

1217

Schedule of Canada
Reservations applicable in Alberta
Reservation II-PT-1
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Alberta reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
relating to lottery schemes, gaming terminals, games of chance,
races, bingos, casinos, or similar activities, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Alberta to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1218

Reservation II-PT-2
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services, retailing
services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 643, 88411

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Alberta reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
in the above mentioned sector that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Alberta to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1219

Reservation II-PT-3
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fishing products

Sub-Sector:

Forest resource and processing
Forestry and logging products
Services incidental to forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 8814

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Alberta reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
relating to the production, processing, marketing, extraction, and
development of forest resources and products derived from them,
that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Alberta to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1220

Reservation II-PT-4
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fishing
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Alberta reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
relating to the production, processing, and collective marketing
of aquaculture, marine, and fish products, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Alberta to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1221

Reservation II-PT-5
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to energy distribution
Transport services via pipeline
Production, transmission and distribution of electricity,
gas, steam and hot water
Crude petroleum and natural gas

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 17, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Alberta reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
relating to: (i) the exploration, production, extraction, and
development of crude petroleum or natural gas; (ii) the granting
of exclusive rights to operate a distribution or transportation
system, including, related pipeline and marine distribution and
transport services; and (iii) the production, transport,
distribution, furnishing, and importation and exportation of
electricity, that:
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(a)

(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Alberta to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
1222

entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.
Existing Measures

1223

Reservations applicable in British Columbia
Reservation II-PT-6

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Production, transmission, and distribution of electricity, gas,
steam and hot water
Crude petroleum and natural gas
Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons
Transport services via pipeline
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 120, 334, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services and Investment
1.
British Columbia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure relating to: (i) the exploration, production, extraction,
and development of crude petroleum or natural gas; (ii) rights to
operate related crude petroleum or natural gas distribution or
transportation systems, including, related pipeline and marine
distribution and transport services; or (iii) the production,
transport, distribution, furnishing, and importation and
exportation of electricity, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic

1224

activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
British Columbia to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.
Existing Measures

1225

Reservation II-PT-7
Sector:

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries products

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Services incidental to forestry and logging

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 8814

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
British Columbia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure relating to the production, processing, marketing,
extraction, and development of forest resources and products
derived from them, including the granting of licences, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service provider or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
British Columbia to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1226

Reservation II-PT-8
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fishing
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
British Columbia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure relating to the production, processing, and collective
marketing of aquaculture, marine, or other fish products that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
British Columbia to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1227

Reservation II-PT-9
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
British Columbia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure relating to the conduct and administration of any
gambling in the Province including lottery schemes, games of
chance or games combining chance and skill, as well as directly
related businesses, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
British Columbia to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1228

Reservation II-PT-10
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services,
retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and
beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
British Columbia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure relating to the importation, marketing, licensing, sale
and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Province that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers that may carry out a specific economic activity,
whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly, exclusive
service supplier, or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(b)
limits the total value of transactions or assets in the form
of a numerical quota or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(c)
limits the total number of operations or the total quantity
of output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the
form of a quota or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(d)
limits the total number of natural persons that may be
employed in a sub-sector or that a covered investment may
employ and who are necessary for, and directly related to, the
performance of an economic activity in the form of a numerical
quota or the requirement of an economic needs test; or
(e)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
British Columbia to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1229

Reservations applicable in Manitoba
Reservation II-PT-11

Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Wholesale trade services of fisheries products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Manitoba reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Manitoba to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1230

Reservation II-PT-12
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transport services via pipeline

Industry Classification:

CPC 713

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Manitoba reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Manitoba to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1231

Reservation II-PT-13
Sector:

Alcoholic Beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services,
retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and
beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Manitoba reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Manitoba to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1232

Reservation II-PT-14
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Electrical energy
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Manitoba reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Manitoba to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1233

Reservation II-PT-15
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Forest resource processing
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Manufacture of paper and paper products, on a fee or
contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 321, 881 (other than rental of agricultural equipment
with operator and 8814) 88430, 88441

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Manitoba reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Manitoba to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1234

Reservation II-PT-16
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Manitoba reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Manitoba to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1235

Reservations applicable in New Brunswick
Reservation II-PT-17

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical energy
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
New Brunswick reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the transfer of hydraulic
power vested in the domain of the Province, the production,
transport, distribution and exportation of electricity, and the
maintenance of electrical facilities, with the exception of
measures imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign
shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of New
Brunswick to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1236

Reservation II-PT-18
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
New Brunswick reserves the right to adopt or maintain
monopolies in the sub-sectors noted above.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of New
Brunswick to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

Gaming Control Act, S.N.B. 2008, c. G-1.5

1237

Reservation II-PT-19
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services,
retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor, wine and
beer stores)
Manufacturing of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
New Brunswick reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors listed above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage
limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of New
Brunswick to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

New Brunswick Liquor Corporation Act, S.N.B. 1974, c. N-6.1

1238

Reservations applicable in Newfoundland and Labrador
Reservation II-PT-20

Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Forest resource processing
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Manufacture of paper and paper products, on a fee or
contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 321, 881 (other than rental of agricultural equipment
with operator and 8814), 88430, 88441

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Newfoundland and Labrador reserves the right to adopt
or maintain a measure relating to the above sub-sectors, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive service supplier, or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or
(b)
restricts or requires a specific type of legal entity or joint
venture through which an investor may perform an economic
activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Newfoundland and Labrador to impose limitations on the
participation of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s
Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1239

Reservation II-PT-21
Sector:

Fishing and hunting

Sub-Sector:

Edible products of animal origin n.e.c.
Raw skins of other animals n.e.c. (fresh or preserved, but
not further prepared)
Fish and other fishing products
Other meat and edible offal, fresh, chilled or frozen
(including rabbit meat), excluding frog legs
Animal oils and fats, crude and refined
Tanned or dressed fur skins
Prepared and preserved fish
Sales on a fee or contract basis of food products,
beverages and tobacco
Wholesale trade services of fishery products

Industry Classification:

CPC 0295, 02974, 04, 21129, 212, 2162, 2831, 62112, 62224,
8813, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Newfoundland and Labrador reserves the right to adopt
or maintain a measure relating to the above sub-sectors, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive service supplier, or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or
(b)
restricts or requires the specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Newfoundland and Labrador to impose limitations on the
participation of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s
Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1240

Reservation II-PT-22
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical energy
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Newfoundland and Labrador reserves the right to adopt
or maintain a measure relating to the above sub-sectors, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive service supplier, or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or
(b)
restricts or requires the specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Newfoundland and Labrador to impose limitations on the
participation of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s
Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1241

Reservation II-PT-23
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Service
1.
Newfoundland and Labrador reserves the right to adopt
or maintain a measure relating to the above sub-sectors, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive service supplier, or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or
(b)
restricts or requires the specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Newfoundland and Labrador to impose limitations on the
participation of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s
Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1242

Reservation II-PT-24
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transportation services via pipeline

Industry Classification:

CPC 7131

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Newfoundland and Labrador reserves the right to adopt
or maintain a measure relating to the above sub-sector, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive service supplier, or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or
(b)
restricts or requires the specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Newfoundland and Labrador to impose limitations on the
participation of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s
Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1243

Reservation II-PT-25
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Newfoundland and Labrador reserves the right to adopt
or maintain a measure relating to the above sub-sectors, that:
(a)
limits the number of covered investments or service
suppliers, whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive service supplier, or the requirement of an economic
needs test; or
(b)
restricts or requires the specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Newfoundland and Labrador to impose limitations on the
participation of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its
equity interests in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or
an existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s
Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1244

Reservations applicable in the Northwest Territories
Reservation II-PT-26

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to animal husbandry
Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 8812, 8813

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1245

Reservation II-PT-27
Sector:

Alcoholic Beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services,
retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and
beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1246

Reservation II-PT-28
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Pulp and paperboard
Forest resource processing
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Manufacture of paper and paper products, on a fee or
contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 321, 881 (other than rental of agricultural equipment
with operator and 8814), 88430, 88441

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1247

Reservation II-PT-29
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories a to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1248

Reservation II-PT-30
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical energy
Transportation services via pipeline
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1249

Reservation II-PT-31
Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Pipeline transport
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the exploration,
production, extraction, and development of crude petroleum or
natural gas, with the exception of measures imposing limitations
on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure granting exclusive rights to operate a
distribution or transportation system, including, related pipeline
and marine distribution and transport services.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1250

Reservation II-PT-32
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Wholesale trade of fishing products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of the
Northwest Territories a to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1251

Reservation II-PT-33
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Other land transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 71222

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Northwest Territories reserves the right to adopt or maintain
economic needs tests for the provision of urban and interurban
bus transportation services. The main criteria include the
examination of the adequacy of current levels of service; market
conditions establishing the requirement for expanded service;
and the effect of new entrants on public convenience, including
the continuity and quality of service, and the fitness, willingness,
and ability of the applicant to provide proper service.

Existing Measures

1252

Reservations applicable in Nova Scotia
Reservation II-PT-34

Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Forest resource processing
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Manufacture of paper and paper products, on a fee or
contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 321, 881 (other than rental of agricultural equipment
with operator and 8814), 88430, 88441

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1253

Reservation II-PT-35
Sector:

Fisheries and hunting

Sub-Sector:

Edible products of animal origin n.e.c.
Raw skins of other animals n.e.c. (fresh or preserved, but not
further prepared)
Fish and other fishing products
Other meat and edible offal, fresh, chilled or frozen (including
rabbit meat), excluding frog legs
Animal oils and fats, crude and refined
Tanned or dressed fur skins
Prepared and preserved fish
Sales on a fee or contract basis of food products, beverages and
tobacco
Wholesale trade services of fishery products
Transportation of frozen or refrigerated goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 0295, 02974, 04, 21129, 212, 2162, 2831, 62112, 62224,
part of 71231, 8813, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1254

Reservation II-PT-36
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical energy
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1255

Reservation II-PT-37
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1256

Reservation II-PT-38
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1257

Reservation II-PT-39
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services,
retailing services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and
beer stores)
Manufacturing of alcoholic beverages.

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1258

Reservation II-PT-40
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Transportation services via pipeline

Industry Classification:

CPC 713

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nova Scotia reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sector noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of Nova
Scotia to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1259

Reservations applicable in Nunavut
Reservation II-PT-41

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to animal husbandry
Services incidental to hunting

Industry Classification:

CPC 8812, 8813

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1260

Reservation II-PT-42
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services, retailing
services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Nunavut has the authority under the Liquor Act to import,
purchase, produce, distribute, supply, market, and sell alcoholic
beverages in Nunavut and to conduct these activities through a
territorial monopoly.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

Liquor Act, R.S.N.W.T. 1988, c. L-9

1261

Reservation II-PT-43
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sector listed above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage
limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or
aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1262

Reservation II-PT-44
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Wholesale trade of fishing products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors listed above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1263

Reservation II-PT-45
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electrical energy
Electricity distribution or control apparatus
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 4621, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measures limiting market access in the sub-sectors noted above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Nunavut maintains a monopoly on the production,
generation, development, transmission, distribution, delivery,
supply and exportation of electricity and related services under
section 5.1 of the Qulliq Energy Corporation Act.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

Qulliq Energy Corporation Act, R.S.N.W.T. 1988, c. N-2

1264

Reservation II-PT-46
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Transport
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors listed above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Nunavut also reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure limiting market access related to oil and gas
development.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1265

Reservation II-PT-47
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Freight transport by sea

Industry Classification:

CPC 7212

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in the sub-sector listed above,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Nunavut to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1266

Reservation II-PT-48
Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Other land transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, 71222

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Nunavut reserves the right to adopt or maintain economic needs
tests for the provision of urban and interurban bus transportation
services. The main criteria include the examination of the
adequacy of current levels of service; market conditions
establishing the requirement for expanded service; and the effect
of new entrants on public convenience, including the continuity
and quality of service, and the fitness, willingness, and ability of
the applicant to provide proper service.

Existing Measures

1267

Reservations applicable in Ontario
Reservation II-PT-49

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Production, transmission, and distribution of electricity, gas,
steam and hot water
Crude petroleum and natural gas
Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons
Transport services via pipeline
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 120, 334, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Ontario reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the exploration, production, generation,
extraction, importation, exportation, transportation, transmission,
distribution, storage, sale, retailing, marketing, conservation,
demand/load management, and development of energy
(including, electricity, natural gas, and renewable energy), with
the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Ontario reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the granting of exclusive rights to own
or operate a transmission or distribution system or to produce,
generate, store, sell, retail, or market energy (including,
electricity, natural gas, or renewable energy).
3.
For greater certainty, this reservation is without prejudice
to the right of Ontario to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1268

Reservations applicable in Prince Edward Island
Reservation II-PT-50

Sector:

Fisheries and aquaculture

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Wholesale trade services of fisheries products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 62224, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Prince Edward Island reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Prince Edward Island to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1269

Reservation II-PT-51
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Renewable energy systems
Electrical energy, oil and natural gas
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 17, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Prince Edward Island reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Prince Edward Island to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1270

Reservation II-PT-52
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products
Forest resource processing
Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry
Manufacture of paper and paper products, on a fee or contract
basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 321, 881 (other than rental of agricultural equipment
with operator and 8814), 88430, 88441

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Prince Edward Island reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Prince Edward Island to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1271

Reservation II-PT-53
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Prince Edward Island reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sector
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Prince Edward Island to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1272

Reservation II-PT-54
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services, retailing
services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Prince Edward Island reserves the right to adopt or
maintain a measure limiting market access in the sub-sectors
noted above, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Prince Edward Island to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1273

Reservations applicable in Québec
Reservation II-PT-55

Sector:

Agriculture, fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Products of agriculture, horticulture and market gardening
Live animals and animal products
Fish and other fishing products
Meat, fish, fruit, vegetables, oils and fats
Dairy products
Grain mill products, starches and starch products; other food
products
Services incidental to agriculture
Services incidental to animal husbandry
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 01, 02, 04, 21, 22, 23, 8811 (other than rental of
agricultural equipment with operator), 8812, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the production, transfer of possession
or ownership, processing, and collective marketing of
aquaculture, marine, and fish products, with the exception of
measures imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign
shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
2.
Québec also reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in connection with the issuance
of permits under the Food Products Act.
3.
These measures include, imposing a public interest test
and taking into account socio-economic factors.
4.
For greater certainty, this reservation is without prejudice
to the right of Québec to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing government enterprise or an
existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation IC-2.

Existing Measures

Food Products Act, C.Q.L.R., c. P-29;
An Act to regularize and provide for the development of local
1274

slaughterhouses, C.Q.L.R., c. R-19.1
An Act respecting the marketing of agricultural, food and fish
products, C.Q.L.R. c. M-35.1
An Act respecting the marketing of marine products, C.Q.L.R., c.
C-32.1;
The Marine Products Processing Act, C.Q.L.R., c. T-11.01

1275

Reservation II-PT-56
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity energy
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 171, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the production, fixing and modification
of rates and conditions, transmission, supply, distribution, and
exportation of electricity, and in the maintenance of electrical
facilities, with the exception of measures imposing limitations on
the participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Québec reserves the right for the purposes of the
activities mentioned in the preceding paragraph, to adopt or
maintain a measure related to the transfer and the granting of
lands in the domain of the State and of movable and immovable
property, and any measure related to all powers and sources of
energy from which it is possible to produce electricity.
3.
Hydro-Québec is the holder of exclusive rights regarding
the production, transmission, distribution and exportation of
electricity. Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain powers
and rights of Hydro-Québec for the purposes of the activities
mentioned previously.
4.
These measures include taking into account socioeconomic factors.
5.
For greater certainty, this reservation is without prejudice
to the right of Québec to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing government enterprise or an
existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation IC-2.

Existing Measures

Hydro-Québec Act, C.Q.L.R., c. H-5
An Act respecting the exportation of electric power, C.Q.L.R., c.
E-23
An Act respecting the Régie de l'énergie, C.Q.L.R., c. R-6.01
An Act respecting municipal and private electric power systems,
C.Q.L.R., c. S-41
1276

Act respecting the Ministère des Ressources naturelles et de la
Faune, C.Q.L.R., c. M-25.2
An Act respecting threatened or vulnerable species, C.Q.L.R., c.
E-12.01
Loi sur la Coopérative régionale d’électricité de Saint-JeanBaptiste de Rouville et abrogeant la Loi pour favoriser
l’électrification rurale par l’entremise de coopératives
d’électricité, L.Q. 1986, c. 21
Watercourses Act, C.Q.L.R., c. R-13

1277

Reservation II-PT-57
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Transport services via pipeline
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the operation of oil and gas distribution
systems and in transport services via pipeline, with the exception
of measures imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign
shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
2.
Québec also reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure limiting market access in oil and gas development.
3.
For greater certainty, this reservation is without prejudice
to the right of Québec to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing government enterprise or an
existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation IC-2.

Existing Measures

An Act respecting the Régie de l’énergie, C.Q.L.R., c. R6.01
Mining Act, C.Q.L.R., c. M-13.1

1278

Reservation II-PT-58
Sector:
Sub-Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services
Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the lotteries, lottery schemes,
amusement machines, video lottery machines, games of chance,
races, betting rooms, bingo, casinos, publicity contests,
consulting and implementation services, with the exception of
measures imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign
shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
2.
The Société des loteries du Québec is or may be granted
a monopoly in the activities mentioned above.
3.
For greater certainty, this reservation is without prejudice
to the right of Québec to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing government enterprise or an
existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation IC-2.

Existing Measures

An Act respecting the Société des loteries du Québec, C.Q.L.R.,
c. S-13.1
An Act respecting lotteries, publicity contests and amusement
machines, C.Q.L.R., c. L-6
An Act respecting racing, C.Q.L.R., c. C-72.1

1279

Reservation II-PT-59
Sector:

Forestry and logging products

Sub-Sector:

Wood in the rough
Products of wood, cork, straw and plaiting materials
Pulp, paper and paper products
Printed matter and related articles

Industry Classification:

CPC 031, 31, 32

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Service
1.
Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the forest sector, notably measures
related to the forest development, the harvesting of forest
resources and the products derived from it (including biomass
and non-timber), with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Québec reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the marketing or processing of forest
resources and the products derived from it as well as any
measure limiting market access in the supply of wood processing
plants, with the exception of measures imposing limitations on
the participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
3.
These measures include, imposing public interest tests
and taking into account socio-economic factors.
4.
For greater certainty, this reservation is without prejudice
to the right of Québec to impose limitations on the participation
of foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing government enterprise or an
existing governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation IC-2.

Existing Measures

An Act respecting the marketing of agricultural, food and fish
products, C.Q.L.R., c. M-35.1
Forest Act, C.Q.L.R., c. F-4.1
Sustainable Forest Development Act, C.Q.L.R., c. A-18.1
An Act respecting the Ministère des Ressources naturelles et de
la Faune, C.Q.L.R., c. M-25.2

1280

1281

Reservations applicable in Saskatchewan
Reservation II-PT-60

Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Saskatchewan reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure to limit the number of covered investments or service
suppliers whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive supplier or the requirements of an economic needs test.
2.
Saskatchewan reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure to restrict or require a specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity in the sub-sectors noted above.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Saskatchewan to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1282

Reservation II-PT-61
Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services, retailing
services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer stores)
Manufacture of alcoholic beverages.

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 643

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Saskatchewan reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure to limit the number of covered investments or service
suppliers whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive supplier or the requirements of an economic needs test.
2.
Saskatchewan reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure to restrict or require a specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity in the sub-sectors noted above.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Saskatchewan to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1283

Reservation II-PT-62
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity, town gas, steam and hot water
Coal gas, water gas, producer gas and similar gases, other than
petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons
Services incidental to energy distribution
Electrical energy
Producer gas
Transport services via pipeline

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Saskatchewan reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure to limit the number of covered investments or service
suppliers whether in the form of a numerical quota, monopoly,
exclusive supplier or the requirements of an economic needs test.
2.
Saskatchewan reserves the right to adopt or maintain a
measure to restrict or require a specific type of legal entity or
joint venture through which an investor may perform an
economic activity in the sub-sectors noted above.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Saskatchewan to impose limitations on the participation of
foreign capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests
in, or the assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing
governmental entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1284

Reservations applicable in Yukon
Reservation II-PT-63

Sector:

Alcoholic beverages

Sub-Sector:

Commission agents’ services, wholesale trade services, retailing
services (liquor, wine and beer, liquor wine and beer stores)
Manufacture and transportation of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

CPC 24 (other than 244), 62112, 62226, 63107, 7123 (other than
71231, 71232, 71233, 71234), 8841

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in advertising, storage, manufacture,
distribution, transport, sale and trade of alcoholic beverages,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
The Yukon Liquor Corporation is the sole commercial
importer of alcoholic beverages into Yukon. In-territory
manufacturers of alcoholic beverages may operate a retail outlet
at the manufacturing facility as a manufacturer’s agent of the
Yukon Liquor Corporation.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1285

Reservation II-PT-64
Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the ownership and operation of
gambling and gaming facilities, with the exception of measures
imposing limitations on the participation of foreign capital in
terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or
the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Yukon reserves the right to limit market access in lottery
schemes, amusement machines, video lottery machines, games
of chance, races, betting theatres, bingo casinos and promotional
contests, and to conduct such activities, including through a
monopoly.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1286

Reservation II-PT-65
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Crude petroleum and natural gas
Transport services via pipeline
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 120, 713, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in the exploration, production, extraction,
and development of oil and gas, with the exception of measures
imposing limitations on the participation of foreign capital in
terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or
the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
granting an exclusive right to operate a natural gas or oil
distribution or transportation system, including, an activity
related to oil and natural gas pipeline and marine distribution and
transport services.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1287

Reservation II-PT-66
Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Production, transmission, and distribution of electricity, gas,
steam and hot water
Electricity and related services

Industry Classification:

CPC 17, 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in water power, the production, transport,
distribution, furnishing, and exportation of electricity, the
commercial and industrial uses of water, and services incidental
to energy distribution with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
Yukon may make available to Yukon Development
Corporation (or any subsidiary or successor corporation) for
operational purposes any facility or any water power that is
owned by Yukon or under its control.
3.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1288

Reservation II-PT-67
Sector:

Forestry

Sub-Sector:

Forestry and logging products

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 531

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in activities related to forestry and
logging products, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1289

Reservation II-PT-68
Sector:

Forestry and agriculture

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to agriculture
Services incidental to animal husbandry
Agricultural land, forest and other wooded land
Crown land leases and permits
Forestry and logging products

Industry Classification:

CPC 03, 531, 8811 (other than rental of agricultural equipment
with operator), 8812

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in agricultural land, forest resources, and
grazing agreements, with the exception of measures imposing
limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of a
maximum percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total
value of individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1290

Reservation II-PT-69
Sector:

Fisheries

Sub-Sector:

Fish and other fishing products
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 04, 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in fisheries, with the exception of
measures imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign
shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1291

Reservation II-PT-70
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Research and experimental development services on natural
sciences and engineering
Research and experimental development services on social
sciences and humanities
Interdisciplinary research and experimental development
services

Industry Classification:

CPC 851, 852 (linguistics and languages only), 853

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access in research and development services,
with the exception of measures imposing limitations on the
participation of foreign capital in terms of a maximum
percentage limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of
individual or aggregate foreign investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1292

Reservation II-PT-71
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Recycling on a fee or contract basis

Industry Classification:

CPC 88493

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
1.
Yukon reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure
limiting market access related to recycling, with the exception of
measures imposing limitations on the participation of foreign
capital in terms of a maximum percentage limit on foreign
shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
2.
This reservation is without prejudice to the right of
Yukon to impose limitations on the participation of foreign
capital when selling or disposing of its equity interests in, or the
assets of, an existing state enterprise or an existing governmental
entity pursuant to Canada’s Reservation I-C-2.

Existing Measures

1293

ANNEX II
Schedule of the European Union
Reservations applicable in the European Union (applicable in all Member States of the
EU unless otherwise indicated)
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
In all Member States of the EU, services considered as public
utilities at a national or local level may be subject to public
monopolies or to exclusive rights granted to private operators.
Public utilities exist in sectors such as related scientific and
technical consulting services, research and development (R&D)
services on social sciences and humanities, technical testing and
analysis services, environmental services, health services,
transport services and services auxiliary to all modes of transport.
Exclusive rights on such services are often granted to private
operators, for instance operators with concessions from public
authorities, subject to specific service obligations. Given that
public utilities often also exist at the sub-central level, detailed and
exhaustive sector-specific scheduling is not practical.
This reservation does not apply to telecommunications and to
computer and related services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure which
1294

accords differential treatment to a country pursuant to any existing
or future bilateral or multilateral agreement which:
a)

creates an internal market in services and investment;

b)

grants the right of establishment; or

c)
requires the approximation of legislation in one or more
economic sectors.
An internal market on services and establishment means an area
without internal frontiers in which the free movement of services,
capital and persons is ensured.
The right of establishment means an obligation to abolish in
substance all barriers to establishment among the parties to the
regional economic integration agreement by the entry into force of
that agreement. The right of establishment shall include the right
of nationals of the Parties to the regional economic integration
agreement to set up and operate enterprises under the same
conditions provided for nationals under the law of the country
where such establishment takes place.
The approximation of legislation means:
(a) the alignment of the legislation of one or more of the parties to
the regional economic integration agreement with the legislation
of the other Party or Parties to that agreement; or
(b) the incorporation of common legislation into the law of the
parties to the regional economic integration agreement.
Such alignment or incorporation shall take place, and shall be
deemed to have taken place, only at such time that it has been
enacted in the law of the Party or Parties to the regional economic
integration agreement.
Existing Measures:

European Economic Area (EEA)
Stabilisation Agreements
EU-Swiss Confederation bilateral agreements

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment

1295

The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment relating to the right of
establishment to nationals or enterprises through existing or
future bilateral agreements between the following Member
States of the EU: BE, DE, DK, EL, ES, FR, IE, IT, LU, NL, PT,
UK, and any of the following countries or principalities: San
Marino, Monaco, Andorra, and the Vatican City State.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure, in
particular within the framework of the Common Fisheries
Policy, and of fishing agreements with a third country, with
respect to access to and use of the biological resources and
fishing grounds situated in maritime waters coming under the
sovereignty or within the jurisdiction of Member States of the
EU.
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure:
(a) regulating the landing of catches performed in the sub-quotas
allocated to vessels of Canada or of a third country in EU ports;
(b) determining a minimum size for a company in order to
preserve both artisanal and coastal fishing vessels; or
(c) according differential treatment to a Canada or a third
country pursuant to existing or future bilateral agreements
relating to fisheries.

1296

A commercial fishing licence granting the right to fish in the
territorial waters of a Member State of the EU may only be
granted to vessels flying the flag of a Member State of the EU.
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the nationality of the crew of a fishing vessel flying the
flag of a Member State of the EU.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in BE, BG, DE, DK, ES, FI,
FR, IT, LT, LU, LV, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SE, SI, SK and UK.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Collection, purification and distribution of water

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 41

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to activities, including services relating to the collection,
purification and distribution of water to household, industrial,
commercial or other users, including the supply of drinking
water, and water management.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services
Services of notaries
Services by bailiffs

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861, part of CPC 87902

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

1297

Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of SE, reserves the right to adopt or
maintain any measure with respect to the supply of legal
advisory and legal authorisation and certification services
provided by legal professionals entrusted with public functions,
such as notaries, “huissiers de justice” or other “officiers publics
et ministériels”, and with respect to services provided by bailiffs
who are appointed by an official act of government.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Distribution and health services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods,
other services provided by pharmacists

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
For all Member States of the EU with the exception of BE, BG,
EE, and IE, mail order is only possible from Member States of
the EEA, thus establishment in any of these countries is required
for the retail of pharmaceuticals and specific medical goods to
the general public in the EU.
In BG, DE and EE, the mail order of pharmaceuticals is
prohibited. In IE, the mail order of pharmaceuticals requiring a
prescription is prohibited.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in BE, FI, SE and SK.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Distribution and health services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods,
other services provided by pharmacists

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

1298

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
The EU, with the exception of EL, IE, LT, LU, NL, and the UK,
reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure which
restricts the number of suppliers entitled to provide a particular
service in a specific local zone or area on a non-discriminatory
basis in order to prevent oversupply in areas of limited demand.
An economic needs test may therefore be applied, taking into
account such factors as the number of and impact on existing
establishments, transport infrastructure, population density or
geographic spread.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in AT, DE, ES, FI, FR, IT,
LU, LV, MT, PT, SE and SI.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Other business services (collection agency services, credit
reporting services)

Industry Classification:

CPC 87901, CPC 87902

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of ES and SE, reserves the right to
adopt or maintain any measure with regard to the supply of
collection agency services and credit reporting services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Placement services of office support personnel and other workers
Supply services of domestic help personnel, other commercial or
industrial workers, nursing, and other personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87202, CPC 87204, CPC 87205, CPC 87206, CPC 87209

1299

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of BE, HU and SE, reserves the right
to require establishment and to prohibit the cross-border supply
of placement services of office support personnel and other
workers.
The EU, with the exception of HU and SE, reserves the right to
adopt or maintain any measure with regard to the supply of
placement services of domestic help personnel, other commercial
or industrial workers, nursing, and other personnel.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in AT, BE, BG, CY, CZ,
DE, EE, ES, FI, FR, IT, LT, LV, MT, PL, PT, RO, SI, and SK.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Investigation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87301

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of AT and SE, reserves the right to
adopt or maintain any measure with regard to the supply of
investigation services. Residency or commercial presence is
required and nationality requirements may exist.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in LT and PT.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

1300

Auxiliary services to maritime, internal waterways, rail and air
transport
Sub-Sector:

Maintenance and repair of vessels, rail transport equipment and
aircraft and parts thereof

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 86764, CPC 86769, CPC 8868,

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of DE, EE and HU, reserves the
right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect to requiring
establishment or physical presence in its territory and prohibiting
the cross-border supply of maintenance and repair services of
rail transport equipment from outside its territory.
The EU, with the exception of CZ, EE, HU, LU and SK, reserves
the right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect to
requiring establishment or physical presence in its territory and
prohibiting the cross-border supply of maintenance and repair
services of internal waterways transport vessels from outside its
territory.
The EU, with the exception of EE, HU and LV, reserves the
right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect to requiring
establishment or physical presence in its territory and prohibiting
the cross-border supply of maintenance and repair services of
maritime vessels from outside its territory.
Only recognised organisations authorised by the EU may carry
out statutory surveys and certification of ships on behalf of
Member States of the EU. Establishment may be required.
The EU, with the exception of AT, EE, HU, LV, and PL,
reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect
to requiring establishment or physical presence in its territory
and prohibiting the cross-border supply of maintenance
(including line maintenance) and repair services of aircraft and
parts thereof from outside its territory.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Communication services

Sub-Sector:

Telecommunication services

1301

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access,
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to broadcast transmission services.
Broadcasting is defined as the uninterrupted chain of
transmission required for the distribution of TV and radio
programme signals to the general public, but does not cover
contribution links between operators.

Existing Measures:

1302

Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 9619, CPC 963 , CPC 964 other than CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of AT reserves the right to adopt or
maintain any measure with respect to the supply of library,
archive, museum, and other cultural services. LT reserves the
right to adopt or maintain any measure requiring the
establishment of suppliers and restricting the cross-border supply
of these services. In AT and LT, a licence or concession may be
required to provide these services.
CY, CZ, FI, MT, PL, RO, SI, and SK reserve the right to adopt
or maintain any measure with respect to the supply of
entertainment services, including theatre, live bands, circus and
discotheque services.
In addition, the EU, with the exception of AT and SE, reserves
the right to adopt or maintain any measure requiring
establishment and restricting the cross-border supply of
entertainment services, including theatre, live bands, circus and
discotheque services.
BG reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of the following entertainment services:
circus, amusement park and similar attraction services, ballroom,
discotheque and dance instructor services, and other
entertainment services.
EE reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of other entertainment services except for
cinema theatre services.
LT and LV reserve the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of all entertainment services other than
cinema theatre operation services.
BG, CY, CZ, EE, LV, MT, PL, RO, and SK reserve the right to
adopt or maintain any measure with respect to the cross-border
supply of sporting and other recreational services.
1303

AT reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of mountain guide or ski school services.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Gambling and betting services

Industry Classification:

CPC 96492

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of MT, reserves the right to adopt or
maintain any measure with respect to the supply of gambling
activities, which involve wagering a stake with pecuniary value
in games of chance, including in particular lotteries, scratch
cards, gambling services offered in casinos, gambling arcades or
licensed premises, betting services, bingo services and gambling
services operated by and for the benefit of charities or nonprofit-making organisations.
This reservation does not apply to games of skill, gambling
machines that do not give prizes or that give prizes only in the
form of free games, and promotional games, whose exclusive
purpose is to encourage the sale of goods or services which are
not covered by this exclusion.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 92

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

1304

Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of all educational services which receive
public funding or State support in any form, and are therefore not
considered to be privately funded.
The EU, with the exception of CZ, NL, SE and SK, reserves the
right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect to the supply
of privately funded other education services, which means other
than those classified as being primary, secondary, higher and
adult education services.
Where the supply of privately funded education services by a
foreign provider is permitted, participation of private operators
in the education system may be subject to concession allocated
on a non-discriminatory basis.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in AT, BG, CY, CZ, FI, FR,
IT, MT, RO, SE, SI, and SK.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health and social services

Sub-Sector:

Human health services
Social services

Industry Classification:

CPC 931 other than 9312, part of 93191

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU, with the exception of HU, reserves the right to adopt or
maintain any measure requiring the establishment or physical
presence in their territory of suppliers and restricting the crossborder supply of health services from outside their territory.
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
requiring the establishment or physical presence in their territory
of suppliers and restricting the cross-border supply of social
services from outside their territory, as well as with respect to

1305

activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or
statutory system of social security.
This reservation does not relate to the supply of all health-related
professional services, including the services provided by
professionals such as medical doctors, dentists, midwives,
nurses, physiotherapists, paramedics, and psychologists, which
are covered by other reservations.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 931, other than 9312 part of CPC 93191

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of all health services which receive public
funding or State support in any form, and are therefore not
considered to be privately funded.
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to all privately funded health services, other than privately
funded hospital, ambulance, and residential health facilities
services other than hospital services.
The participation of private operators in the privately funded
health network may be subject to concession on a nondiscriminatory basis. An economic needs test may apply. Main
criteria: number of and impact on existing establishments,
transport infrastructure, population density, geographic spread,
and creation of new employment.
This reservation does not relate to the supply of all health-related
professional services, including the services supplied by
professionals such as medical doctors, dentists, midwives,
nurses, physiotherapists, paramedics, and psychologists, , which
are covered by other reservations.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in AT, BE, BG, CY, CZ, FI,
1306

FR, MT, PL, SI, SK and UK.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professional services: medical and dental services,
midwife services, nursing services, physiotherapeutic and paramedical services, psychologist services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, part of CPC 93191

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
In the EU, with the exception of BE, FI, NL and SE, the supply
of all health-related professional services, including the services
provided by professionals such as medical doctors, dentists,
midwives,
nurses,
physiotherapists,
paramedics,
and
psychologists, requires residency.
These services may only be provided by natural persons
physically present in the territory of the EU.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in AT, BE, BG, FI, FR, MT,
SK and UK.

Existing Measures:

None

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of all social services which receive public
1307

funding or State support in any form, and are therefore not
considered to be privately funded, and with regard to activities or
services forming part of a public retirement plan or statutory
system of social security.
The participation of private operators in the privately funded
social network may be subject to concession on a nondiscriminatory basis. An economic needs test may apply. Main
criteria: number of and impact on existing establishments,
transport infrastructure, population density, geographic spread,
and creation of new employment.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in BE, CY, CZ, DE, DK,
EL, ES, FI, FR, HU, IE, IT, LT, MT, PL, PT, RO, SI, SK, and
UK.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Financial Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
requiring a financial institution, other than a branch, when
establishing in a Member State of the EU to adopt a specific
legal form, on a non-discriminatory basis.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

1308

Description:

Financial services
Only firms having their registered office in the EU can act as
depositories of the assets of investment funds. The establishment
of a specialised management company, having its head office
and registered office in the same Member State of the EU, is
required to perform the activities of management of common
funds, including unit trusts, and where allowed under national
law, investment companies.

Existing Measures:

Council Directive 85/611/EEC of 20 December 1985 on the
coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions
relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable
securities (UCITS).

Sector:

Air transport

Sub-Sector:

Services auxiliary to air transport

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment to a third country pursuant
to existing or future bilateral agreements relating to the
following Auxiliary air transport services:
(a) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(b) computer reservation system (CRS) services; and
(c) other services auxiliary to air transport, such as groundhandling services and airport operation services.
In respect of maintenance and repair of aircrafts and parts, the
EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure which
accords differential treatment to a third country pursuant to
existing or future trade agreements pursuant to Article V of
GATS.

Existing Measures:

1309

Sector:

Air transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors
Performance requirements
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
relating to air services, or related services in support of air
services and other services supplied by means of air transport
other than the services set out in Article 8.2.2(a) (i) to (v), with
respect to the establishment, acquisition or expansion of a
covered investment, to the extent that such measures are not
excluded from the scope of Sections B and C of Chapter Eight
(Investment).

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 5133, CPC 5223,
CPC 722, CPC 74520, CPC 74540, CPC 74590, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and board of directors

Description:

Investment
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the registration of a non-seagoing vessel in order to fly
the national flag of a Member State of the EU, and with regard to
the establishment of a registered company for the purpose of
operating a fleet under the national flag of the State of

1310

establishment. This reservation relates to, among other elements,
requirements for incorporation or to maintain a principal office
in the Member State of the EU concerned, as well as
requirements relating to ownership of capital and control.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 5133 CPC 5223,CPC 721,CPC 722,CPC 74520, CPC
74540, CPC 74590
Any other commercial activity undertaken from a ship

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and board of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the nationality of crew on a seagoing or non-seagoing
vessel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport
Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 72, CPC 745

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of national cabotage transport.

1311

Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be
considered as cabotage under the relevant national legislation,
national cabotage transport is assumed to cover transportation of
passengers or goods between a port or point located in a Member
State of the EU and another port or point located in the same
Member State of the EU, including on its continental shelf as
provided in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, and
traffic originating and terminating in the same port or point
located in a Member State of the EU.
For greater certainty, this reservation applies inter alia to feeder
services. This reservation does not apply to shipping companies
of Canada repositioning owned or leased containers on a nonrevenue basis.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport: pilotage and berthing services, pushing and
towing

Industry Classification:

CPC 7214, CPC 7224, CPC 7452

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of pilotage and berthing services. For
greater clarity, regardless of the criteria which may apply to the
registration of ships in a Member State of the EU, the EU
reserves the right to require that only ships registered on the
national registers of Member States of the EU may provide
pilotage and berthing services.
For the EU, with the exception of LT and LV, only vessels
carrying the flag of a Member State of the EU may provide
pushing and towing services.
For LT, only juridical persons of Lithuania or juridical persons
of a Member State of the EU with branches in Lithuania that
have a Certificate issued by the Lithuanian Maritime Safety
Administration may provide pilotage and berthing, pushing and
towing services.

1312

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Internal waterways transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 722

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment to a third country pursuant
for existing or future agreements relating to access to inland
waterways (including agreements following the Rhine-MainDanube link), which reserve traffic rights for operators based in
the countries concerned who meet nationality criteria regarding
ownership.
Subject to regulations implementing the Mannheim Convention
on Rhine Shipping. This part of the reservation only applies to
the following Member States of the EU: BE, FR, DE, and NL.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to require establishment and to limit
the cross-border supply of road transport services.
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain measures limiting
the supply of cabotage within a Member State of the EU by
foreign investors established in another Member State of the EU.
An economic needs test may apply to taxi services in the EU
with the exception of BE. The economic needs test, when
1313

applied, sets a limit on the number of service suppliers. Main
criteria: Local demand as provided in applicable laws.
For road passenger and freight transportation, national
complementary reservations may be found in the schedules of
reservations applicable in AT, BE, BG, ES, FI, FR, IE, IT, LT,
LV, MT, PT, RO, SE, and SK.
Existing Measures:

Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing common rules
concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the
occupation of road transport operator and repealing Council
Directive 96/26/EC
Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access
to the international road haulage market
Regulation (EC) No 1073/2009 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access
to the international market for coach and bus services, and
amending Regulation (EC) No 561/2006

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road and rail transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 7111, CPC 7112, CPC 7121, CPC 7122, CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment to a country pursuant to
existing or future bilateral agreements relating to international
road haulage (including combined transport – road or rail) and
passenger transport, concluded between the EU or the Member
States of the EU and a third country.
Such treatment may:
(a) reserve or limit the supply of the relevant transport services
between the contracting Parties or across the territory of the
contracting Parties to vehicles registered in each contracting
Party80; or

80

With regard to Austria the part of the most-favoured-nation treatment exemption regarding traffic rights
covers all countries with whom bilateral agreements on road transport or other arrangements relating to
road transport exist or may be considered in future.

1314

(b) provide for tax exemptions for such vehicles.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Space transport
Rental of space craft

Industry Classification:

CPC 733, part of CPC 734

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the transportation services via space and the rental of
space craft.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity and gas transmission systems
Oil and gas pipeline transport

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 401, 402, CPC 7131, CPC 887 (other than advisory
and consultancy services)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Where a Member State of the EU permits foreign ownership of a
gas or electricity transmission system, or an oil and gas pipeline
transport system, the EU reserves the right to adopt or maintain
any measure with respect to enterprises of Canada controlled by
1315

natural persons or enterprises of a third country which accounts
for more than 5 per cent of the EU's oil or natural gas or
electricity imports, in order to guarantee the security of the
energy supply of the EU as a whole, or of an individual Member
State of the EU.
This reservation does not apply to advisory and consultancy
services provided as services incidental to energy distribution.
This reservation does not apply to HU and LT (for LT, only CPC
7131) with regard to the pipeline transport of fuels, nor to LV
with regard to services incidental to energy distribution, nor to SI
with regard to services incidental to the distribution of gas.
National complementary reservations may be found in the
schedules of reservations applicable in BE, BG, CY, FI, FR, HU,
LT, NL, PT, SI and SK.
Existing Measures:

Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the
internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 2003/54/EC
Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the
internal market in natural gas and repealing Directive
2003/55/EC
***

1316

Reservations applicable in Austria
Sector:

Manufacture of nuclear fuel, electricity, gas and water supply

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear based electricity generation, processing of nuclear
material and fuel, transportation and handling of nuclear material

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 233, ISIC rev 3.1 40

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Austria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the processing, distribution or transportation of nuclear
material and generation of nuclear-based energy.

Existing Measures:

Bundesverfassungsgesetz für ein atomfreies Österreich
(Constitutional Law on a Nuclear Free Austria),
BGBl. I Nr. 149/1999

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Placement services of office support personnel and other workers
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Austria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of supply services of office support
personnel, and the establishment of suppliers of placement
services of office support personnel and other workers.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

1317

Sub-Sector:

Higher education services
Adult education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Austria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of privately funded higher education
services.
Austria reserves the right to prohibit the cross-border supply of
privately funded adult education services by means of radio or
television broadcasting.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Ambulance services

Industry Classification:

CPC 93192

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Austria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded ambulance services.

Existing Measures:
***

1318

Reservations applicable in Belgium
Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
A fishing licence is mandatory for performing marine fishing
activities in Belgium. The owner of a vessel who has a fishing
licence is either a legal person or a natural person. The natural
person has to be a resident of Belgium when applying for a
fishing licence. The legal person has to be a domestic firm and
the managers of the domestic firm have to be active in fisheries
and to be residents of Belgium when applying for a fishing
licence.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of security services by a foreign provider on a crossborder basis is not allowed.
Requirement of nationality of a Member State of the EU for
boards of directors of companies providing guard and security
services, as well as consultancy and training relating to security
services. The senior management of companies providing guard
1319

and security consultancy services are required to be resident
nationals of a Member State of the EU.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Mail order is only authorised for pharmacies open to the public,
thus establishment in Belgium is required for the retail of
pharmaceuticals

Existing Measures:

Arrêté royal du 21 janvier 2009 portant instructions pour les
pharmaciens
Arrêté royal du 10 novembre 1967 relatif à l’exercice des
professions des soins de santé

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Ambulance services
Residential health services other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Belgium reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded ambulance and
residential health services other than hospital services.

Existing Measures:

1320

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professional services: medical and dental services,
midwife services, nursing services, physiotherapeutic and paramedical services, psychologist services, veterinary services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 85201, CPC 9312, part of CPC 93191, CPC932

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Belgium reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
relating to the cross-border supply of medical, dental and
midwives services and services provided by nurses,
physiotherapists and paramedical personnel, and veterinary
services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Belgium reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

1321

Sub-Sector:

Cargo handling services

Industry Classification:

CPC 741

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Cargo handling services can only be operated by accredited
workers, eligible to work in port areas designated by royal
decree.

Existing Measures:

Loi du 8 juin 1972 organisant le travail portuaire.
Arrêté royal du 12 janvier 1973 instituant une Commission
paritaire des ports et fixant sa dénomination et sa compétence
Arrêté royal du 4 septembre 1985 portant agrément d’une
organisation d’employeur (Anvers)
Arrêté royal du 29 janvier 1986 portant agrément d’une
organisation d’employeur (Gand)
Arrêté royal du 10 juillet 1986 portant agrément d’une
organisation d’employeur (Zeebrugge)
Arrêté royal du 1er mars 1989 portant agrément d’une
organisation d’employeur (Ostende)
Arrêté royal du 5 juillet 2004 relatif à la reconnaissance des
ouvriers portuaires dans les zones portuaires tombant dans le
champ d'application de la loi du 8 juin 1972 organisant le travail
portuaire, tel que modifié.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 71221

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Belgium reserves the right to restrict the availability of licences
to provide taxi services.
For the Brussels Capital Region: A maximum number of
licences is fixed by law.
For the Flemish Region: A maximum number of taxis per capita
is fixed by law. This number can be adjusted, in which case an
1322

economic needs test is applied. Main criteria: degree of
urbanisation, average occupancy rate of existing taxis.
For the Walloon Region: A maximum number of taxis per capita
is fixed by law. This number can be adjusted, in which case an
economic needs test is applied. Main criteria: average occupancy
rate of existing taxis.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Production of electricity

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 4010

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment
An individual authorisation for the production of electricity of a
capacity of 25 MW requires establishment in the EU, or in
another State which has a similar regime to that enforced by
Directive 96/92 in place, and where the company has an effective
and continuous link with the economy.
The offshore production of electricity within the offshore
territory of Belgium is subject to concession and a joint venture
obligation with a company from a Member State of the EU, or a
foreign company from a country having a similar regime to that
of Directive 2003/54/EC, particularly with regard to conditions
relating to the authorisation and selection. Additionally, the
company should have its central administration or its head office
in a Member State of the EU or a country meeting the above
criteria, where it has an effective and continuous link with the
economy.
The construction of electrical power lines which link offshore
production to the transmission network of Elia requires
authorisation and the company must meet the previously
specified conditions, except for the joint venture requirement.

Existing Measures:

Arrêté Royal du 11 octobre 2000 fixant les critères et la
procédure d'octroi des autorisations individuelles préalables à la
construction de lignes directes
Arrêté Royal du 20 décembre 2000 relatif aux conditions et à la
procédure d'octroi des concessions domaniales pour la

1323

construction et l'exploitation d'installations de production
d'électricité à partir de l'eau, des courants ou des vents, dans les
espaces marins sur lesquels la Belgique peut exercer sa
juridiction conformément au droit international de la mer
Arrêté Royal du 12 mars 2002 relatif aux modalités de pose de
câbles d'énergie électrique qui pénètrent dans la mer territoriale
ou dans le territoire national ou qui sont installés ou utilisés dans
le cadre de l'exploration du plateau continental, de l'exploitation
des ressources minérales et autres ressources non vivantes ou de
l'exploitation d'îles artificielles, d'installations ou d'ouvrages
relevant de la juridiction belge

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Energy transmission services and bulk storage services of gas

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 4010, CPC 71310, part of CPC 742, CPC 887 (other
than consultancy services)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Belgium reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
related to the types of legal entities and to the treatment of public
or private operators to whom Belgium has conferred exclusive
rights. Establishment is required within EU for energy
transmission services and for bulk storage services of gas.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Energy distribution services and services incidental to energy
distribution

Industry Classification:

CPC 887 (other than consultancy services)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services

1324

Belgium reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
related to energy distribution services and services incidental to
energy distribution.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Transport via pipeline of fuel

Industry Classification:

CPC 7131

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Cross-border Trade in Services
The pipeline transport of natural gas and other fuels is subject to
an authorisation requirement. An authorisation may only be
granted to a natural or juridical person established in a Member
State of the EU (in accordance with Art. 3 of the AR of 14 May
2002).
Where the authorisation is requested by a company then:
(a) the company must be established in accordance with Belgian
law, or the law of another Member State of the EU, or the law of
a third country, which has undertaken commitments to maintain
a regulatory framework similar to the common requirements
specified in Directive 98/30/EC of the European Parliament and
the Council of 22 June 1998 concerning common rules for the
internal market in natural gas; and
(b) the company must hold its administrative seat, its principal
establishment or its head office within a Member State of the
EU, or a third country, which has undertaken commitments to
maintain a regulatory framework similar to the common
requirements specified in Directive 98/30/EC of the European
Parliament and the Council of 22 June 1998 concerning common
rules for the internal market in natural gas, provided that the
activity of this establishment or head office represents an
effective and continuous link with the economy of the country
concerned.

Existing Measures:

Arrêté Royal du 14 mai 2002 relatif à l’autorisation de transport
de produits gazeux et autres par canalisations.

1325

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Wholesaling services of electricity and gas

Industry Classification:

CPC 62271

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Description:

Cross-border Trade in Services
An authorisation is necessary for the supply of electricity by an
intermediary having customers established in Belgium who are
connected to the national grid system or to a direct line whose
nominal voltage is higher than 70,000 volts. Such an
authorisation may only be granted to a natural or juridical person
established in the EEA.
In general, the supply of natural gas to customers (customers
being both distribution companies and consumers whose overall
combined consumption of gas arising from all points of supply
attains a minimum level of one million cubic metres per year)
established in Belgium is subject to an individual authorisation
provided by the minister, except where the supplier is a
distribution company using its own distribution network. Such
an authorisation may only be granted to a natural or juridical
person established in a Member State of the EU.

Existing Measures:

Arrêté royal relatif aux autorisations de fourniture d'électricité
par des intermédiaires et aux règles de conduite applicables à
ceux-ci
Arrêté royal du 12 juin 2001 relatif aux conditions générales de
fourniture de gaz naturel et aux conditions d'octroi des
autorisations de fourniture de gaz naturel

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear energy

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 233, ISIC rev 3.1 40

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Belgium reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the production, processing or transportation of

1326

nuclear material and generation or distribution of nuclear-based
energy.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Mining and quarrying, manufacturing and energy

Sub-Sector:

Mining and quarrying, manufacture of refined petroleum
products and nuclear fuel, electricity, gas and hot water supply

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 10, ISIC rev 3.11110, ISIC rev 3.1 13, ISIC rev 3.1
14, ISIC rev 3.1 232, part of ISIC rev 3.1 4010, part of ISIC rev
3.1 4020, part of ISIC rev 3.1 4030

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
With the exception of the mining of metal ores and other mining
and quarrying, enterprises of Canada controlled by natural
persons or enterprises of a third country which accounts for more
than 5 per cent of the EU's oil or natural gas or electricity
imports may be prohibited from obtaining control of the activity.
Incorporation is required (no branching).

Existing Measures:
***

1327

Reservations applicable in Bulgaria
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Description:

Investment
Foreign natural and foreign juridical persons (including through
a branch) cannot acquire ownership of land in Bulgaria. Juridical
persons of Bulgaria with foreign participation cannot acquire
ownership of agricultural land. Foreign juridical persons and
foreign citizens with permanent residence abroad can acquire
ownership of buildings and limited property rights (right to use,
right to build, right to raise a superstructure and servitudes) of
real estate. Foreign citizens with permanent residence abroad,
foreign juridical persons and companies in which foreign
participation ensures a majority in adopting decisions or blocks
the adoption of decisions, can acquire real estate property rights
in specific geographic regions designated by the Council of
Ministers subject to permission.

Existing Measures:

Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, art. 22
Law on Ownership and Use of Agricultural Land, art. 3
Law on Forests, art. 10

Sector:

All sectors other than mining and quarrying

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Measures:

Law on State Property
Concessions Act
Law on Privatisation and Post-Privatisation Control

Description:

Investment

1328

Certain economic activities related to the exploitation or use of
State or public property are subject to concessions granted under
the provisions of the Concessions Act.
Commercial corporations in which the State or a municipality
holds a share in the capital exceeding 50 per cent, cannot effect
any transactions for disposition of fixed assets of the corporation,
to conclude any contracts for acquisition of participating interest,
lease, joint activity, credit, securing of receivables, as well as
incurring any obligations arising under bills of exchange, unless
permitted by the Privatisation Agency or the municipal council,
whichever is the competent authority.
This reservation does not apply to mining and quarrying, which
are subject to a separate reservation in Annex I.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The taking of marine and river-living resources, performed by
vessels in the internal marine waters, the territorial sea and on
the inland waterways of Bulgaria, shall be performed by vessels
flying the flag of Bulgaria. A foreign ship may not engage in
commercial fishing in the exclusive economic zone save on the
basis of an agreement between Bulgaria and the flag state. While
passing through the exclusive economic zone, foreign fishing
ships may not maintain their fishing gear in operational mode.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

1329

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 40, CPC 71310, part of CPC 88

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the production of electricity and heat and to the
services incidental to energy distribution, as well as to pipeline
transportation, storage and warehousing of petroleum and natural
gas, including transit transmission.

Existing Measures:

Energy Act

Sector:

Manufacturing, electricity, gas and water supply

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear-based electricity generation
Processing of nuclear material and fuel
Transportation or handling of nuclear material

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 23, ISIC rev 3.1 40

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the processing of fissionable and fusionable
materials or the materials from which they are derived, as well as
to the trade therewith, to the maintenance and repair of
equipment and systems in nuclear energy production facilities, to
the transportation of such materials and the refuse and waste
matter of their processing, to the use of ionising radiation, and on
all other services relating to the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes (incl. engineering and consulting services and
services relating to software, etc.).

Existing Measures:

Safe Use of Nuclear Energy Act

1330

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In Bulgaria, full national treatment on the establishment and
operation of companies, as well as on the supply of services,
may be extended only to companies established in, and citizens
of, the countries with whom preferential arrangements have been
or will be concluded.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211 and CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Measures:

Independent Financial Audit Act

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
An independent financial audit shall be implemented by
registered auditors who are members of the Institute of the
Certified Public Accountants. Subject to reciprocity, the Institute
of the Certified Public Accountants shall register an audit entity
of Canada or of a third country upon the latter's furnishing proof
that:
(a) three-fourths of the members of the management bodies and
the registered auditors carrying out audit on behalf of the entity
meet requirements equivalent to those for Bulgarian auditors and
have passed successfully the examinations for it;
(b) the audit entity carries out independent financial audit in
accordance with the requirements for independence and
objectivity; and
(c) the audit entity publishes on its website an annual
transparency report or performs other equivalent requirements
for disclosure in case it audits public-interest entities.

1331

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Veterinary services

Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Measures:

Veterinary Practices Act

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In Bulgaria, a veterinary medical establishment may be
established by a natural or a legal person.
The practice of veterinary medicine is subject to a condition of
nationality of a Member State of the EU or the EEA, otherwise a
permanent residence permit is required for foreign nationals
(physical presence is required).

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
1332

services of office support personnel.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Distribution

Sub-Sector:

Distribution of chemical products
Distribution of precious metals and stones
Distribution of pharmaceuticals, products and objects for
medical use and medical substances
Distribution of tobacco and tobacco products
Distribution of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 621, CPC 62228, CPC 62251, CPC 62271, part of
CPC 62272, CPC 62276, CPC 63108, part of CPC 6329

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services

1333

Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the distribution chemical products, precious
metals and stones, pharmaceuticals, medical substances and
products and objects for medical use; tobacco and tobacco
products and alcoholic beverages.
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the services provided by commodity brokers.
Existing Measures:

Law on Medicinal Products in Human Medicine
Law of Veterinary Activity
Law for Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and for Control over
Toxic Chemical Substances and Their Precursors
Law for Tobacco and Tobacco Products

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
restricting the cross-border supply of privately funded primary
and secondary education services.
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded higher education
services.

Existing Measures:

Public Education Act, art. 12
Law for the Higher Education, paragraph 4 of the additional
provisions
Vocational Education and Training Act, art. 22

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Cross-Border supply of financial services
1334

Description:

Financial Services
Transport insurance, covering goods, insurance of vehicles as
such and liability insurance regarding risks located in the
Bulgaria may not be underwritten by foreign insurance
companies directly.

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded hospital,
ambulance, and residential health services other than hospital
services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professional services: medical and dental services,
midwife services, nursing services, physiotherapeutic and paramedical services, psychologist services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, part of 9319

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Bulgaria reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of all health-related professional
1335

services, including medical and dental services, services
provided by nurses, midwives, physiotherapists, paramedical
personnel, as well as psychologist services.
Existing Measures:

Law for Medical Establishments
Professional Organisation of Medical Nurses, Midwives and
Associated Medical Specialists Guild Act

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for road transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 744

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Measures:

Bulgarian Act for Road Transport, art. 6

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Establishment is required.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Water transport

Sub-Sector:

Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 741, part of CPC 742

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In so far as Canada and its provinces and territories allow service
suppliers from Bulgaria to supply cargo-handling services and
storage and warehouse services in sea and river harbours,
including services relating to containers and goods in containers,
Bulgaria will allow services suppliers from Canada to supply
cargo-handling services and storage and warehouse services in
sea and river harbours, including services relating to containers
and goods in containers under the same conditions.

Existing Measures:

1336

Sector:

Rail transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7111, CPC 7112

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures that are taken under existing or future agreements, and
which regulate traffic rights and operating conditions, and the
supply of transport services in the territory of Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic and Slovakia and between the countries
concerned..

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Road transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7111, CPC 7112

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures taken under existing or future agreements, which
reserve or restrict the supply of these kinds of transportation
services and specify the terms and conditions of this supply,
including transit permits or preferential road taxes, in the
territory of Bulgaria or across the borders of Bulgaria.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1337

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
For passenger and freight transportation, exclusive rights or
authorisations may only be granted to nationals of a Member
State of the EU and to juridical persons of the EU having their
headquarters in the EU.
Incorporation is required. Condition of nationality of a Member
State of the EU for natural persons.

Existing Measures:
***

1338

Reservations applicable in Croatia
Sector:

Agriculture, hunting

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 011, ISIC rev 3.1 012, ISIC rev 3.1 013, ISIC rev
3.1 014, ISIC rev 3.1 015, CPC 8811, CPC 8812, CPC 8813
other than advisory and consultancy services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Croatia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to agricultural and hunting activities.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Urban planning

Industry Classification:

CPC 8674

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Croatia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the cross-border supply of urban planning.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87305

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
1339

Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Croatia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to security consultation services and guard services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Other business services

Sub-Sector:

Translation and interpretation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87905

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Croatia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the cross-border supply of translation and
interpretation of official documents.

Existing Measures

Sector:

Transport services

Sub-Sector:

Road transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7111 and CPC 7112

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures applied under existing or future agreements on
international road transport and which reserve or limit the supply
of transport services and specify operating conditions, including
transit permits or preferential road taxes of transport services
into, in, across and out of Croatia to the parties concerned.

Existing Measures:

1340

Sector:

Transport services

Sub-Sector:

Services auxiliary to all modes of transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 741, CPC 742, CPC 743, CPC 744, CPC 745, CPC 746,
CPC 749

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Croatia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the cross-border supply of services auxiliary to
transport other than freight transport agency services,
transportation preparation document services and supporting
services for road transport that are subject to permit.

Existing Measures:
***

1341

Reservations applicable in Cyprus
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the establishment of placement services of office support
personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of security services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

1342

Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded primary, secondary,
higher, and adult education services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services
Ambulance services
Residential health services other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded hospital, ambulance,
and residential health services other than hospital services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1343

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 232, ISIC rev 3.1 4010, ISIC rev 3.1 4020, CPC
613, CPC 62271, CPC 63297, CPC 7131, CPC 742, and CPC
887 (other than advisory and consulting services)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors
Performance requirements

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
limiting the cross-border supply of and requiring establishment
for storage and warehousing services of fuels transported
through pipelines, and the retail sales of fuel oil and bottled gas
other than by mail order.
Cyprus reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the manufacture of refined petroleum products
in so far as the investor is controlled by a natural or juridical
person of a non-EU country which accounts for more than 5 per
cent of the EU's oil or natural gas imports, as well as to the
manufacture of gas, distribution of gaseous fuels through mains
on own account, the production, transmission and distribution of
electricity, the pipeline transportation of fuels, services
incidental to electricity and natural gas distribution other than
advisory and consulting services, wholesale services of
electricity, retailing services of motor fuel, electricity and nonbottled gas.

1344

Existing Measures:

The Regulating of the Electricity Market Laws of 2003 to 2008
(arts. 34(2) and 37)
The Regulating of the Gas Market Laws of 2004 to 2007
The Petroleum (Pipelines) Law, Chapter 273 of the Constitution
of the Republic of Cyprus
The Petroleum Law L.64(I)/1975
The Petroleum and Fuel Specifications Laws of 2003 to 2009
***

1345

Reservations applicable in the Czech Republic
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, CPC 822

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the cross-border supply of real estate
services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auction services

Industry Classification:

part of CPC 612, part of CPC 621, part of CPC 625, part of
85990

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Auction services in the Czech Republic are subject to licence. To
obtain a licence (for the supply of voluntary public auctions), a
company must be incorporated in the Czech Republic and a
natural person is required to obtain a residency permit, and the
company, or natural person must be registered in the
Commercial Register of the Czech Republic.

Existing Measures:

Act no.455/1991 Coll., Trade Licence Act
Act no. 26/2000 Coll., on public auctions

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

1346

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Only an enterprise in which at least 60 per cent of capital
interests or voting rights are reserved to nationals of the Czech
Republic or of the Member States of the EU may be authorised
to carry out audits in the Czech Republic.

Existing Measures:

Law of 14 April 2009 no. 93/2009 Coll., on Auditors

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the establishment of placement services of
office support personnel.
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the supply of executive search services and
supply services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

1347

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In the Czech Republic, the majority of the members of the board
of directors of an establishment providing privately-funded
education services must be nationals of the Czech Republic.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services
Ambulance services
Residential health services other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
1348

Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the supply of privately funded hospital,
ambulance, and residential health services other than hospital
services.

Existing Measures:

Act No. 372/2011 Sb. on Health Care Services and Conditions of
Their Provision

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professional services: medical and dental services,
midwife services, nursing services, physiotherapeutic and paramedical services, psychologist services
Other health-related services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, part of CPC 9319

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the supply of all health-related
professional services, including the services provided by
professionals such as medical doctors, dentists, midwives,
nurses, physiotherapists, paramedics, and psychologists, as well
as other health-related services relating to the handling of human
tissues, organs and cells intended for use in man.

Existing Measures:

Act No 296/2008 Coll., on Safeguarding the Quality and Safety
of Human Tissues and Cells Intended for Use in Man ("Act on
Human Tissues and Cells")
Act No 378/2007 Coll., on Pharmaceuticals and on Amendments
to Some Related Acts (Act on Pharmaceuticals)
Act. 123/2000 Coll., on Medical Devices
Act. 285/2002 Coll., on the Donating, Taking and Transplanting
of Tissues and Organs and on Amendment to Certain Acts
(Transplantation Act)

1349

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The Czech Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the supply of privately funded social
services.

Existing Measures

Sector:

Rail transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7111, CPC 7112

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures that are taken under existing or future agreements, and
which regulate traffic rights and operating conditions, and the
supply of transport services in the territory of Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic and Slovakia and between the countries
concerned.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Road transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, CPC 7122, CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

1350

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures that are taken under existing or future agreements, and
which reserve or limit the supply of transport services and
specify operating conditions, including transit permits or
preferential road taxes of a transport services into, in, across and
out of the Czech Republic to the contracting parties concerned.

Existing Measures:
***

1351

Reservations applicable in Denmark
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures taken by Denmark, Sweden and Finland aimed at
promoting Nordic cooperation, such as:
(a) financial support to research and development (R&D)
projects (the Nordic Industrial Fund);
(b) funding of feasibility studies for international projects (the
Nordic Fund for Project Exports); and
(c) financial assistance to companies81 utilizing environmental
technology (the Nordic Environment Finance Corporation).
This reservation is without prejudice to the exclusion of
procurement by a Party, subsidies, or governmental support for
trade in services in Arts. 8.14.5(a) and (b), and 9.2.2(f) and (g)
respectively.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

81

Applies to East European companies, which are cooperating with one or more Nordic companies.

1352

Description:

Investment
Non-EU residents cannot own one-third or more of a business
engaged in commercial fishing in Denmark.
Non-EU residents cannot own Danish flag vessels except
through an enterprise incorporated in Denmark.
For a company to register its vessel as a Danish fishing vessel, at
least two-thirds of the owners of the company must be registered
as fishermen having an "A" status fishing licence, or two-thirds
of the shares of the company must be owned by another
company which is entirely owned by fishermen having an "A"
status licence.
To obtain an "A" status fishing licence, a natural person must
have lived in Denmark for two years prior to the request to
obtain a licence or hold Danish citizenship. These restrictions do
not apply to persons within the EU or Member States of the
EEA.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Denmark reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of airport guard services.
In order to provide security services in Denmark, it is a
requirement to be a national juridical person.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

1353

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
No persons or companies (including insurance companies) may,
for business purposes in Denmark, assist in effecting direct
insurance for persons resident in Denmark, for Danish ships or
for property in Denmark, other than insurance companies
licensed by Danish law or by Danish competent authorities.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Denmark reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded social services
other than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and
Old People's Homes.

Existing Measures:
***

1354

Reservations applicable in Estonia
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Description:

Investment
Only a natural person who is an Estonian citizen or the citizen of
a Member State of the EEA, or a legal person who is entered in
the appropriate Estonian register, may acquire an immovable
used for profit yielding land, the land use type categories of
which include agricultural or forest land, and only with the
authorisation of the county governor.
This reservation does not apply to the acquisition of agricultural
or forest land for the purposes of providing a service which is
liberalised under this agreement.

Existing Measures:

Kinnisasja omandamise kitsendamise seadus (Restrictions on
Acquisition of Immovables Act) § 2, § 3

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Estonia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the establishment of placement services of office support
personnel.
Estonia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel.

1355

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Estonia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
For acceptance of deposits, requirement of authorisation by the
Estonian Financial Supervision Authority and registration under
Estonian law as a joint-stock company, a subsidiary or a branch.

Existing Measures:

Krediidiasutuste seadus (Credit Institutions Act) § 20.6.

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Maritime transport

1356

Road transport
Rail transport
Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 711, part of CPC 712, part of CPC 721

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Estonia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment to a country pursuant to
existing or future bilateral agreements on international road
transport (including combined transport-road or rail), reserving
or limiting the supply of a transport services into, in, across and
out of Estonia to the contracting Parties to vehicles registered in
each contracting Party, and providing for tax exemption for such
vehicles.

Existing Measures:
***

1357

Reservations applicable in Finland
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Restrictions on the right for natural persons, who do not enjoy
regional citizenship in Åland, and for legal persons, to acquire
and hold real property on the Åland Islands without obtaining
permission from the competent authorities of the Åland Islands.
Restrictions on the right of establishment and right to carry out
economic activities by natural persons, who do not enjoy
regional citizenship in Åland, or by any enterprise, without
obtaining permission from the competent authorities of the
Åland Islands.

Existing Measures:

Ahvenanmaan maanhankintalaki (Act on land acquisition in
Åland) (3/1975), s. 2
Ahvenanmaan itsehallintolaki (Act on the Autonomy of Åland)
(1144/1991), s. 11

Sector:

All services

Sub-Sector:

Electronic identification services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to require establishment in Finland, or
elsewhere in the EEA in order to provide electronic
identification services.

Existing Measures:

Laki vahvasta sähköisestä tunnistamisesta ja sähköisistä
allekirjoituksista (Act on Strong Electronic Identification and
Electronic Signatures) 617/2009

1358

1359

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures taken by Denmark, Sweden and Finland aimed at
promoting Nordic cooperation, such as:
(a) financial support to R&D projects (the Nordic Industrial
Fund);
(b) funding of feasibility studies for international projects (the
Nordic Fund for Project Exports); and
(c) financial assistance to companies82 utilizing environmental
technology (the Nordic Environment Finance Corporation).
This reservation is without prejudice to the exclusion of
procurement by a Party, subsidies, or governmental support for
trade in services in Arts. 8.14.5 (a) and (b), and 9.2.2 (f) and (g)
respectively.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Manufacture of nuclear fuel, electricity, gas and water supply

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear based electricity generation
Processing of nuclear material and fuel
Transportation or handling of nuclear material

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 233, ISIC rev 3.1 40

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the processing, distribution or transportation of nuclear
material and generation of nuclear-based energy.

82

Applies to East European companies, which are cooperating with one or more Nordic companies.

1360

Existing Measures:

Ydinenergialaki (Nuclear Energy Act) (990/1987)

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services of office support personnel and other workers
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel and other workers.

Existing Measures:

Laki julkisesta työvoima- ja yrityspalvelusta (Act on Public
Employment and Enterprise Service) (916/2012)

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of security services by a foreign provider on a crossborder basis is not allowed.
Licences to provide security services may be granted only to
natural persons resident in the EEA or juridical persons
established in the EEA.

1361

Existing Measures:

Laki yksityisistä turvallisuuspalveluista (Private Security
Services Act) 282/2002

Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Distribution of alcoholic beverages

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 62112, CPC 62226, CPC 63107, CPC 8929

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of distribution of alcoholic beverages.

Existing Measures:

Alkoholilaki (Alcohol Act) (1143/1994)

Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Distribution of pharmaceutical products

Industry Classification:

CPC 62117, CPC 62251, CPC 63211, CPC 8929

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to distribution of pharmaceutical products.

Existing Measures:

Lääkelaki (Medicine Act) (395/1987)

Sector:

Energy

1362

Sub-Sector:

Transmission and distribution networks and systems
Importation, wholesale and retail of electricity
Production and distribution of gas, steam and hot water

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 40, CPC 7131, CPC 887 (other than advisory and
consultancy services)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Performance requirements

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to transmission and distribution networks and systems of
energy and of steam and hot water.
Finland reserves the right to prevent control or ownership of a
liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal (including those parts of
the LNG terminal used for storage or re-gasification of LNG) by
foreign persons or enterprises for energy security reasons.
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the importation, wholesale and retail of electricity.
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain quantitative
restrictions in the form of monopolies or exclusive rights for the
importation of natural gas, and for the production and
distribution of steam and hot water.
Currently, natural monopolies and exclusive rights exist.

Existing Measures:

Maakaasumarkkinalaki (Natural Gas Market Act) (508/2000)
Sähkömarkkinalaki (Electricity Market Act) (386/1995)

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

1363

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded primary, secondary,
higher, and adult education services.

Existing Measures:

Perusopetuslaki (Basic Education Act) (628/1998)
Lukiolaki (General Upper Secondary Schools Act) (629/1998)
Laki ammatillisesta koulutuksesta (Vocational Training and
Education Act) (630/1998)
Laki ammatillisesta aikuiskoulutuksesta (Vocational Adult
Education Act) (631/1998)
Ammattikorkeakoululaki (Polytechnics Act) (351/2003)
Yliopistolaki (Universities Act) (558/2009)

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services
Ambulance services
Residential health services other than hospital services
Other human health services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193, CPC 93199

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded hospital, ambulance,
residential health services other than hospital services, and other
human health services.

Existing Measures:

Laki yksityisestä terveydenhuollosta (Act on Private Health Care)
(152/1990)

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professions: medical and dental services, services
provided by midwives, physiotherapeutic and para-medical
1364

services, services provided by psychologists
Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, CPC 93191

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of all health-related professional services,
whether publicly or privately funded, including medical and
dental services, services provided by midwives, physiotherapists
and paramedical personnel, and services provided by
psychologists. This reservation does not apply to services
provided by nurses.

Existing Measures:

Laki yksityisestä terveydenhuollosta (Act on Private Health
Care) (152/1990)

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services.

Existing Measures:

Laki yksityisistä sosiaalipalveluista (Private Social Services Act)
(922/2011).

Sector:

Financial services

1365

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Cross-Border supply of financial services
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Financial Services
The supply of insurance broker services is subject to a permanent
place of business in the EU.
Only insurers having their head office in the EU or having their
branch in Finland may offer direct insurance services, including
co-insurance.
At least one half of the members of the board of directors and the
supervisory board, the managing director of an insurance
company providing statutory pension insurance shall have their
place of residence in the EEA, unless the competent authorities
have granted an exemption. Foreign insurers cannot obtain a
licence in Finland as a branch to carry on statutory pension
insurance. At least one auditor shall have his permanent
residence in the EEA.
For other insurance companies, residency in the EEA is required
for at least one member of the board of directors and the
supervisory board and the managing director. At least one
auditor shall have his permanent residence in the EEA.
The general agent of an insurance company of Canada must have
his place of residence in Finland, unless the company has its
head office in the EU.

Existing Measures:

Laki ulkomaisista vakuutusyhtiöistä (Act on Foreign Insurance
Companies) (398/1995)
Vakuutusyhtiölaki (Insurance Companies Act) (521/2008)
Laki vakuutusedustuksesta (Act on Insurance Mediation)
(570/2005)
Laki työeläkevakuutusyhtiöistä (Act on Companies providing
statutory pension insurance) (354/1997)

Sector:

Financial services

1366

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
At least one of the founders, the members of the board of
directors, the supervisory board, the managing director of
banking services providers and the person entitled to sign the
name of the credit institution shall have their permanent
residence in the EEA. At least one auditor shall have his
permanent residence in the EEA.
For payment services, residency or domicile in Finland may be
required.

Existing Measures:

Laki liikepankeista ja muista osakeyhtiömuotoisista
luottolaitoksista (Act on Commercial Banks and Other Credit
Institutions in the Form of a Limited Company) (1501/2001)
Säästöpankkilaki (1502/2001) (Savings Bank Act)
Laki osuuspankeista ja muista osuuskuntamuotoisista
luottolaitoksista (1504/2001) (Act on Cooperative Banks and
Other Credit Institutions in the Form of a Cooperative Bank)
Laki hypoteekkiyhdistyksistä (936/2001) (Act on Morgage
Societies)
Maksulaitoslaki (297/2010) (Act on Payment Institutions)
Laki ulkomaisen maksulaitoksen toiminnasta Suomessa
(298/2010) (Act on the Operation of Foreign Payment Institution
in Finland)
Laki luottolaitostoiminnasta (Act on Credit Institutions)
(121/2007)

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Passenger or freight transport by rail

Industry Classification:

CPC 7111, CPC 7112

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1367

National treatment
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to cross-border supply of rail transport.
With regard to establishment of rail passenger transport services,
currently, there are exclusive rights (granted to VR-Group Ltd
that is 100 per cent owned by the State) until 2017 in Helsinki
Metropolitan Area and elsewhere until 2019 in this field, which
may be renewed.

Existing Measures:

Rautatielaki (Railway Act) (304/2011)

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment
Commercial fishing can only be exercised by vessels flying the
flag of Finland. Additional requirements may apply, which
relate, inter alia, to ownership of the vessel and the existence of
a sufficient connection to the fishing industry of Finland.

Existing Measures:

Merilaki (Maritime Act) 674/1994
Kalastuslaki (Fishing Act) 286/1982
Laki merellä toimivien kalastus- ja vesiviljelyalusten
rekisteröinnistä (Act on Registration of Sea-going vessels
engaged in Fishing and Aquaculture) 690/2010

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

1368

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Authorisation is required to provide road transport services,
which is not extended to foreign registered vehicles.

Existing Measures:

Laki kaupallisista tavarankuljetuksista tiellä (Act on Commercial
Road Transport) 693/2006
Ajoneuvolaki (Vehicles Act) 1090/2002

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Maritime transport
Road transport
Rail transport

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 711, part of CPC 712, part of CPC 721

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Finland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment to a country pursuant to
existing or future bilateral agreements exempting vessels
registered under the foreign flag of a specified other country or
foreign registered vehicles from the general prohibition from
providing cabotage transport (including combined transport, road
and rail) in Finland on the basis of reciprocity.

Existing Measures:
***

1369

Reservations applicable in France
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Types of establishment - Pursuant to arts. L151-1 and R153-1
sec of the financial and monetary code, foreign investments in
France in sectors listed in art. R153-2 of the financial and
monetary code are subject to prior approval from the Minister for
the Economy.

Existing Measures:

Financial and monetary code, arts. L151-1, R153-1

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Measures:
Description:

Investment
Types of establishment - France reserves the right to limit
foreign participation in newly privatised companies to a variable
amount, determined by the government of France on a case by
case basis, of the equity offered to the public.
For establishing in certain commercial, industrial or artisanal
activities, a specific authorisation is needed if the managing
director is not a holder of a permanent residence permit.

Existing Measures

1370

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment
Nationals of non-EU countries cannot participate in French
maritime State property for fish, shellfish or algae farming.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
France reserves the right to restrict the number of suppliers of
placement services. These services are subject to a state
monopoly.
France reserves the right to require establishment and to prohibit
the cross-border supply of supply services of office personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

1371

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of security services by a foreign provider on a crossborder basis is not allowed.
Nationality requirement for managing directors and directors.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
Insurance of risks relating to ground transport may be
underwritten only by insurance firms established in the EU.

Existing Measures:

Art. L 310-10 du code des assurances

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Laboratory analysis and testing

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 9311

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
France reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of privately funded laboratory analysis and
testing services.

1372

Existing Measures:

Art. L 6213-1 à 6213-6 du Code de la Santé Publique

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
France reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Sector:

Tourism and travel related services

Sub-Sector:

Tourist guides services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
France reserves the right to require nationality of a Member State
of the EU for the supply of tourist guide services in its territory.

Existing Measures:

None

Sector:

News and press agency services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 962

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

1373

Description:

Investment
Foreign participation in existing companies publishing
publications in the French language may not exceed 20 per cent
of the capital or of voting rights in the company.
Establishment of press agencies of Canada is subject to
conditions set out in domestic regulation.
Establishment of press agencies by foreign investors is subject to
reciprocity.

Existing Measures:

Ordonnance n° 45-2646 du 2 novembre 1945 portant
règlementation provisoire des agences de presse
Loi n° 86-897 du 1 août 1986 portant réforme du régime
juridique de la presse

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity and gas transmission systems
Oil and gas pipeline transport

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 401, ISIC rev 3.1 402, CPC 7131, CPC 887

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
France reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to electricity and gas transmission systems and oil and gas
pipeline transport.
Only companies where 100 per cent of the capital is held by the
French State, by another public sector organisation or by EDF,
may own and operate electricity transmission or distribution
systems.
Only companies where 100 per cent of the capital is held by the
French State, by another public sector organisation or by GDFSuez, may own and operate gas transmission or distribution
systems for reasons of national energy security.

Existing Measures:

Loi N° 2004-803 du 9 août 2004 relative au service public de
l’électricité et du gaz et aux entreprises électriques et gazières

1374

Loi N°2005-781 du 13 juillet 2005
Loi N°2000-108 du 10 février 2000

Sector:

Production of electricity

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 4010

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
France reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the production of electricity.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Manufacturing, production, processing, generation, distribution
or transportation of nuclear material

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear based electricity generation
Processing of nuclear material and fuel
Transportation or handling of nuclear material

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 12, ISIC rev 3.1 23, ISIC rev 3.1 40, ISIC rev 3.1
1200, ISIC rev 3.1 2330, part of ISIC rev 3.1 4010

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
The manufacturing, production, processing, generation,
distribution or transportation of nuclear material must respect the
obligations of the Euratom-Canada agreement.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Rental or leasing services without operators

Sub-Sector:

Other rental or leasing services without operators

Industry Classification:

CPC 832

1375

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
France reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of other rental or leasing services without
operator.

Existing Measures:

1376

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Foreign investors are not allowed to provide intercity bussing
services.

Existing Measures:
***

1377

Reservations applicable in Germany
Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The majority of shares must be owned by citizens of a Member
State of the EU or companies established in accordance with EU
rules and that have their principal place of business in a Member
State of the EU. The use of the vessels must be headed and
supervised by persons residing in Germany.
In order to obtain a fishing licence, all fishing vessels must
register with the relevant coastal states in which the ships have
their home ports.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Environmental services

Sub-Sector:

Waste management: sewage, refuse disposal, and sanitation
services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9401, CPC 9402, CPC 9403

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
prohibiting the cross-border supply of services and requiring
establishment with respect to the supply of waste management
services, other than advisory services.
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
relating to the designation, establishment, expansion, or
operation of monopolies or exclusive services suppliers

1378

providing waste management services.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Environmental services

Sub-Sector:

Soil management

Industry Classification:

CPC 94060

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
prohibiting the cross-border supply of services and requiring
establishment with respect to services relating to the protection
of soil and the management of contaminated soils, other than
advisory services.
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
relating to the designation, establishment, expansion, or
operation of monopolies or exclusive services suppliers
providing soil management and protection services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
Compulsory air insurance policies can be underwritten only by a
subsidiary established in the EU or by a branch established in
Germany.

Existing Measures:

§§ 105 ff "Versicherungsaufsichtsgesetz" (VAG), insbesondere
§ 105 Abs. 2 VAG: „Versicherungsunternehmen eines
Drittstaates,
die
im
Inland
das
Erstoder
Rückversicherungsgeschäft durch Mittelspersonen betreiben
wollen, bedürfen der Erlaubnis.“
1379

1380

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
If a foreign insurance company has established a branch in
Germany, it may conclude insurance contracts in Germany
relating to international transport only through the branch
established in Germany.

Existing Measures:

§ 43 Abs. 2 Luftverkehrsgesetz (LuftVG) und § 105 Abs. 1
Luftverkehrszulassungsordnung (LuftVZO)

Sector:

Other business services

Sub-Sector:

Placement and supply services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203, CPC 87204, CPC 87205,
CPC 87206, CPC 87209

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services.
Germany reserves the right to restrict the number of suppliers of
placement services. Authorisation is subject to an economic
needs test. Main criteria: situation and development of the labour
market.
Germany reserves the right to introduce or maintain a monopoly
of the Federal Labour Agency (Bundesagentur für Arbeit).
Pursuant to Sec. 292 Social Code No. III (Drittes Buch
Sozialgesetzbuch – SGB III), the Federal Ministry of Labour and
Social Affairs may issue a regulation concerning the placement
and recruitment of extra-EU and extra-EEA personnel for
specified professions.

1381

Existing Measures:

Sec. 42 Employment Regulation (Beschäftigungsverordnung)

Sector:

Health and social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 93

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of the Social Security System of
Germany, where services may be provided by different
companies or entities involving competitive elements which are
thus not "Services carried out exclusively in the exercise of
governmental authority". Germany reserves the right to accord
better treatment in the context of a bilateral trade agreement with
regard to the supply of health and social services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded social services
other than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and
Old People's Homes.
1382

Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
regarding the Social Security System of Germany, where
services are provided by different companies or entities
involving competitive elements and might therefore not fall
under the definition of the “Services carried out exclusively in
the exercise of governmental authority”.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services

Industry Classification:

93110

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Germany reserves the right to maintain national ownership of
privately funded hospitals run by the German Forces. Germany
reserves the right to nationalise other key privately funded
hospitals.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting services

Sub-Sector:

Entertainment services, including theatre, live bands and circus
services
Libraries, archives and museums and other cultural services

Industry Classification:

CPC 96, other than CPC 962 and CPC 964 and audiovisual
services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services

1383

Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
prohibiting the cross-border supply of services irrespective of
their mode of production, distribution, or transmission and
requiring establishment with respect to entertainment services,
with the exception of audiovisual services which are not subject
to liberalisation under this agreement.
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of libraries, archives, museums and
other cultural services.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear-based electricity generation
Processing of nuclear material and fuel
Transportation or handling of nuclear material

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 120, ISIC rev 3.1 40, CPC 887.

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the processing or transportation of nuclear
material and generation of nuclear-based energy.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Rental or leasing of vessels

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7213, CPC 7223, CPC 83103

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Chartering-in of foreign ships by consumers resident in Germany

1384

may be subject to a condition of reciprocity.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Other services not included elsewhere

Sub-Sector:

Funeral, cremation and undertaking services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9703

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Germany reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to funeral, cremation and undertaking services. Only
juridical persons established under public law may operate a
cemetery. The creation and operation of cemeteries and services
related to funerals are carried out as governmental services.

Existing Measures:
***

1385

Reservations applicable in Greece
Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Greece reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:
***

1386

Reservations applicable in Hungary
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the acquisition of state-owned properties.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Legal entities

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Measures:
Description:

Investment
Commercial presence should take a form of limited liability
company, joint-stock company or representative office. Initial
entry as a branch is not permitted except for financial services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of arable land

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

1387

Description:

Investment
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the acquisition of arable land by foreign legal
persons and non-resident natural persons, including with regard
to the authorisation process for the acquisition of arable land.

Existing Measures:

Act LV of 1994 on Arable Land

Sector:

Agriculture

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 011, ISIC rev 3.1 012, ISIC rev 3.1 013, ISIC rev
3.1 014, ISIC rev 3.1 015 other than advisory and consultancy
services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

National treatment
Investment

Existing Measures:

Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measures
with respect to agricultural activities.

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Accounting, bookkeeping and auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, CPC 86220

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to cross-border activities for accounting,
bookkeeping and auditing services.

Existing Measures:

Act C of 2000, Act LXXV of 2007

Sector:

Business services
1388

Sub-Sector:

Real estate services

Industry Classification:

CPC 821, CPC 822

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the cross-border supply of real estate services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Services incidental to manufacturing
Services incidental to energy distribution

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 884, CPC 887 other than advisory and consulting
services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to services incidental to energy distribution, and to
the cross-border supply of services incidental to manufacturing,
with the exception of advisory and consulting services relating to
these sectors.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87304, CPC 87305

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

1389

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of armoured car services and guard services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Duplicating services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87904

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in services
Hungary reserves the right to require establishment for the
supply of duplicating services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
The supply of direct insurance in the territory of Hungary by
insurance companies not established in the EU is allowed only
through a branch office registered in Hungary.

Existing Measures:

Act LX of 2003

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital, ambulance and residential health services other than
hospital services

1390

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
requiring the establishment or physical presence in its territory of
suppliers and restricting the cross-border supply from outside its
territory of all hospital, ambulance, and residential health
services other than hospital services, which receive public
funding.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Recreational, cultural and sporting agencies

Sub-Sector:

News and press agencies services

Industry Classification:

CPC 962

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services

1391

Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of news and press agencies services.
Existing Measures:

None

Sector:

Manufacturing of electricity, gas and water supply

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear based electricity generation
Processing of nuclear fuel

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 2330, part of ISIC rev 3.1 4010

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Hungary reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the processing of nuclear fuel and nuclear-based
electricity generation.

Existing Measures:

Act CXVI of 1996 on Nuclear Energy, Government Decree Nr.
72/2000 on Nuclear Energy

Sector:

Energy services

Sub-Sector:

Pipeline transportation of fuels

Industry Classification:

CPC 7131

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of pipeline transport services requires establishment.
Services may be provided through a Contract of Concession
granted by the state or the local authority. The supply of this
service is regulated by the Hungarian Concession Law.

Existing Measures:

Act XVI of 1991 about Concessions

1392

***

1393

Reservations applicable in Ireland
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Ireland reserves the right to require establishment and to prohibit
the cross-border supply of the supply of executive search
services.
Ireland reserves the right to require establishment and to prohibit
the cross-border supply of supply services of office personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Ireland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport
1394

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation

Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, CPC 7122

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Economic needs test for intercity bussing services. Main criteria:
number of and impact on existing establishments, population
density, geographical spread, impact on traffic conditions and
creation of new employment.

Existing Measures:

Public Transport Regulation Act 2009
***

1395

Reservations applicable in Italy
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
The Government may exercise certain special powers in
enterprises operating in the areas of defence and national
security, and in certain activities of strategic importance in the
areas of energy, transport and communications. This relates to all
juridical persons carrying out activities considered of strategic
importance in the areas of defence and national security, not only
to privatised companies.
Where there is a threat of serious injury to the essential interests
of defence and national security, the Government has following
special powers:
(a) to impose specific conditions in the purchase of shares;
(b) to veto the adoption of resolutions relating to special
operations such as transfers, mergers, splitting up, and changes
of activity; or
(c) to reject the acquisition of shares, where the buyer seeks to
hold a level of participation in the capital that is likely to
prejudice the interests of defence and national security.
Any resolution, act and transaction (transfers, mergers, splitting
up, change of activity, termination) relating to strategic assets in
the areas of energy, transport and communications shall be
notified by the concerned company to the Prime Minister’s
office. In particular, acquisitions by any physical or juridical
person outside the EU that give this person control over the
company shall be notified.
The Prime Minister may exercise the following special powers:
(a) to veto any resolution, act and transaction that constitutes an
exceptional threat of serious injury to the public interest in the
security and operation of networks and supplies;
(b) to impose specific conditions in order to guarantee the public
interest; or
(c) to reject an acquisition in exceptional cases of risk to the

1396

essential interests of the State.
The criteria on which to evaluate the real or exceptional threat
and conditions and procedures for the exercise of the special
powers are laid down in the law.
Existing Measures:

Law 56/2012 on special powers in companies operating in the
field of defence and national security, energy, transport and
communications
Decree of the Prime Minister DPCM 253 of 30.11.2012 defining
the activities of strategic importance in the field of defence and
national security

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Fishing in Italian territorial waters is reserved to Italian flagged
vessels.

Existing Measures:

Royal Decree 327/1942 (modified with Law 222/2007), arts.
143, 221 (Navigation Code)

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors
1397

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Italy reserves the right to require establishment and to prohibit
the cross-border supply of supply services of office personnel.
Italy reserves the right to restrict the number of suppliers of
placement services and supply services of office personnel.

Existing Measures:

Legislative Decree 276/2003 arts. 4, 5

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Primary education services
Secondary education services
Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Italy reserves the right to require establishment and to restrict the
cross-border supply of privately funded primary and secondary
education services.

Existing Measures:

Royal Decree 1592/1933 (Law on secondary education)
Law 243/1991 (Occasional public contribution for private
universities)
Resolution 20/2003 of CNVSU (Comitato nazionale per la
valutazione del sistema universitario)
Decree of the President of the Republic (DPR) 25/1998

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (except insurance)

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services

1398

Italy reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure relating
to the activities of "promotori di servizi finanziari".
Existing Measures:

Arts. 91-111 of Consob Regulation on Intermediaries (no. 16190
of 29 October 2007)

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
Transport insurance of goods, insurance of vehicles as such and
liability insurance regarding risks located in Italy may be
underwritten only by insurance companies established in the EU,
except for international transport involving imports into Italy.

Existing Measures:

Art. 29 of the code of private insurance (Legislative decree no.
209 of 7 September 2005)

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
Italy reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
requiring establishment and limiting the cross-border supply of
actuarial services.

Existing Measures:

Law 194/1942 on the actuarial profession

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
1399

Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment
Italy reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:

Law 833/1978 Institution of the public health system
Legislative Decree 502/1992 Organisation and discipline of the
health field
Law 328/2000 Reform of social services

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
An economic needs test is applied to limousine services. Main
criteria: number of and impact on existing establishments,
population density, geographical spread, impact on traffic
conditions and creation of new employment.
An economic needs test is applied to intercity bussing services.
Main criteria: number of and impact on existing establishments,
population density, geographical spread, impact on traffic
conditions and creation of new employment.
An economic needs test is applied to the supply of freight
transportation services. Main criteria: local demand.

Existing Measures:

Legislative decree 285/1992 (Road Code and subsequent
amendments) art. 85
Legislative Decree 395/2000 art. 8 (road transport of passengers)
Law 21/1992 (Framework law on non-scheduled public road
transport of passengers)
Law 218/2003 art. 1 (transport of passenger through rented buses
with driver)

1400

Law 151/1981 (framework law on public local transport)

***

1401

Reservations applicable in Latvia
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of rural land

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment
Latvia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the acquisition of rural land by nationals of Canada or
of a third country, including with regard to the authorisation
process for the acquisition of rural land.

Existing Measures:

Law on land privatisation in rural areas, ss. 28, 29, 30.

Sector:

Veterinary services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 932

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Latvia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
relating to the cross-border supply of veterinary services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

1402

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Latvia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search, placement services, and
supply services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Latvia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment

1403

For passenger and freight transportation services, an
authorisation is required, which is not extended to foreign
registered vehicles.
Established entities are required to use nationally registered
vehicles.
Existing Measures:
***

1404

Reservations applicable in Lithuania
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to enterprises of strategic importance to national
security which must belong to the State by the right of ownership
(proportion of capital which may be held by private national or
foreign persons conforming to national security interests,
procedure and criteria for determination of conformity of
potential national investors and potential enterprise participants,
etc.).

Existing Measures:

Law on Enterprises and Facilities of Strategic Importance for
National Security and Other Enterprises of Importance to
Ensuring National Security of the Republic of Lithuania of 21
July 2009 No. XI-375.

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Purchase of land

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which is consistent with the commitments taken by the EU and
which are applicable in Lithuania in the General Agreement on
Trade in Services (GATS) with respect to land acquisition. The
land plot acquisition procedure, terms and conditions, as well as
1405

restrictions shall be established by the Constitutional Law, the
Law on Land and the Law on the Acquisition of Agricultural
Land.
However, local governments (municipalities) and other national
entities of Members of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development and North Atlantic Treaty
Organization conducting economic activities in Lithuania, which
are specified by the constitutional law in compliance with the
criteria of European and other integration which Lithuania has
embarked on, are permitted to acquire into their ownership nonagricultural land plots required for the construction and operation
of buildings and facilities necessary for their direct activities.
Existing Measures:

Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania
The Constitutional Law of the Republic of Lithuania on the
Implementation of Paragraph 3 of Art. 47 of the Constitution of
the Republic of Lithuania of 20 June 1996, No. I-1392 as last
amended 20 March 2003, No. IX-1381
Law on land, of 27 January 2004, No. IX-1983
Law on acquisition of agricultural land of 24 April 2014, No.
XII-854

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Legal services

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 861

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Attorneys from foreign countries can participate as advocates in
court only in accordance with bilateral agreements on legal
assistance.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

1406

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search, placement services, and
supply services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Investigation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87301

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment

1407

In Lithuania, investigation services are a monopoly reserved to
the State.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Tourism and travel-related services

Sub-Sector:

Tourist guides services

Industry Classification:

CPC 7472

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In so far as Canada and its provinces and territories allow
nationals of Lithuania to provide tourist guide services,
Lithuania will allow nationals of Canada to provide tourist guide
services under the same conditions.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Telecommunications

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
State Enterprise “Infostruktura” has exclusive rights to provide
the following services: data transmission through secure state
data transmission networks, granting of internet addresses ending
“gov.lt”, certification of electronic cash-registers.

Existing Measures:

Government Resolution of 28 May 2002 No.756 On the approval
of the standard procedure for setting prices and tariffs of goods
and services of a monopolistic nature provided by state owned
enterprises and public institutions established by ministries,
governmental institutions and county governors and assigned to
them.

1408

Sector:

Construction services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 51

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Measures:

Law on Construction of Republic of Lithuania of 19 March 1996
No. I-1240

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The right to prepare design documentation for construction
works of exceptional significance is only given to a design
enterprise registered in Lithuania, or a foreign design enterprise
which has been approved by an institution authorised by the
Government for such activities. The right to perform technical
activities in the main areas of construction may be granted to a
non-Lithuanian person who has been approved by an institution
authorised by the Government of Lithuania.

Existing Measures:

Law on Construction of Republic of Lithuania of 19 March 1996
No. I-1240

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

1409

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the cross-border supply of all social services
which receive public funding or State support in any form, and
are therefore not considered to be privately funded.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
Senior management and boards of directors
National Treatment

Measures:

Law on Banks of the Republic of Lithuania of 30 March 2004
No IX-2085
Law on Collective Investment Undertakings of the Republic of
Lithuania of 4 July 2003 No IX-1709
Law on Supplementary Voluntary Pension Accumulation of the
Republic of Lithuania of 3 June 1999 No VIII-1212

Description:

Financial Services
For the purpose of asset management, incorporation as a
specialised management company (no branches) is required.
Only banks having their registered office or branch in Lithuania
may act as the depositories of the assets of investment fund
Only banks having their registered office or branch in Lithuania
and authorised to provide investment services in the Member
States of the European Union.EU or in the Member States of the
EEA may act as the depositories of the assets of pension funds.
At least one head of a bank’s administration must speak the
Lithuanian language and permanently reside in Lithuania.

Existing Measures:

1410

Sector:

Energy services

Sub-Sector:

Pipeline transportation of fuels

Industry Classification:

CPC 7131

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to pipeline transportation of fuels.

Existing Measures:

Law on Natural Gas of the Republic of Lithuania of 10 October
2000 No VIII-1973

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Storage and warehouse services of fuels transported through
pipelines

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 402, CPC 742

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Lithuania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to services auxiliary to pipeline transport of goods
other than fuel.

Existing Measures:

Law On Natural Gas of the Republic of Lithuania 10 October
2000 No VIII-1973 (Art 10.8)

Sector:

Business services
Auxiliary services to maritime, internal waterways, rail and air
transport

Sub-Sector:

Maintenance and repair of vessels, rail transport equipment and
aircraft and parts thereof

Industry Classification:

CPC 86764, CPC 86769, part of CPC 8868

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
1411

In Lithuania, maintenance and repair services of rail transport
equipment are subject to a state monopoly.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Road transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, CPC 7122, CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures that are taken under bilateral agreements and which set
the provisions for transport services and specify operating
conditions, including bilateral transit and other transport permits
for transport services into, through and out of the territory of
Lithuania to the contracting parties concerned, and road taxes
and levies.

Existing Measures:
***

1412

Reservations applicable in Malta
Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
For the purposes of the registration and licensing of a fishing
vessel, the owner, captain or master of the fishing vessel shall be
resident in Malta, in accordance with the terms of the provisions
of the Immovable Property (Acquisition by Non-Residents) Act.

Existing Measures:

Art. 5 of Subsidiary Legislation 425.07 on Fishing Vessels
Regulations

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Malta reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Malta reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel.

1413

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Malta reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Malta reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded primary, secondary,
higher, and adult education services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

1414

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services
Ambulance services
Residential health services other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Malta reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded hospital, ambulance,
and residential health services other than hospital services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professional services: medical and dental services,
midwife services, nursing services, physiotherapeutic and paramedical services, psychologist services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9312, part of CPC 9319

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
This reservation applies to all health-related professional
services, including the services provided by professionals such
as medical doctors, dentists, midwives, nurses, physiotherapists,
paramedics, and psychologists, In Malta, these services may only
be provided by nationals of a Member State of the EU having
prior authorisation, which may be subject to an economic needs
test (ENT).

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

1415

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Malta reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of privately funded social services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport services

Sub-Sector:

Road transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Public bus service: The entire network is subject to a concession
which includes a Public Service Obligation agreement to cater
for certain social sectors (such as students and the elderly).

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Water transport
Supporting services for water transport

Industry Classification:

CPC 7213, CPC 7214, part of 742, CPC 745, part of CPC 749

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services

1416

Exclusive rights exist for the maritime link to mainland Europe
through Italy with Malta.
Existing Measures:
***

1417

Reservations applicable in the Netherlands
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Netherlands reserves the right to require establishment and to
prohibit the cross-border supply of supply services of office
personnel.

Existing Measures:
***

1418

Reservations applicable in Poland
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Preferential conditions for establishment or the cross-border
supply of services, which may include the elimination or
amendment of certain restrictions embodied in the list of
reservations applicable in Poland, may be extended through
commerce and navigation treaties.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Fishing
Aquaculture
Services incidental to fishing

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 0501, ISIC rev 3.1 0502, CPC 882

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Poland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
which accords differential treatment to services and service
suppliers of a country pursuant to existing or future bilateral
agreements relating to fishing in the geographical area of
fisheries falling within the jurisdiction of the countries involved,
in accordance with international conservation practices and
policies or agreements on fisheries, particularly in the Baltic Sea
basin.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

1419

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Poland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Poland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Reserve the right to adopt or maintain any measure with regard
to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

1420

Sub-Sector:

Ambulance services

Industry Classification:

CPC 93192

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Poland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of ambulance services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Poland reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

All passenger and freight transport services other than maritime
transport

Industry Classification:

Part of CPC 711, part of CPC 712, part of CPC 722

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In so far as Canada and its provinces and territories allow the
1421

supply of transport services into and across the territory of
Canada by passenger and freight transport suppliers of Poland,
Poland will allow the supply of transport services by passenger
and freight transport suppliers of Canada into and across the
territory of Poland under the same conditions.
Existing Measures:
***

1422

Reservations applicable in Portugal
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Portugal reserves the right to waive nationality requirements for
the exercise of certain activities and professions by natural
persons supplying services for countries in which Portuguese is
the official language (Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, GuineaBissau, Mozambique and São Tomé & Principe).

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212, other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the cross-border supply of auditing services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

1423

Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The cross-border supply of security services by a foreign service
supplier is not allowed
Nationality condition for specialised personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Investigation services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87301

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
In Portugal, investigation services are a monopoly reserved to
the State.

Existing Measures:

1424

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

Type of Reservation:

Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
Air and maritime transport insurance, covering goods, aircraft,
hull and liability, can be underwritten only by firms established
in the EU.
Only persons or companies established in the EU may act as
intermediaries for such insurance business in Portugal.

Existing Measures:

Art. 7 of Decree-Law 94-B/98 and art. 7 of Decree-Law
144/2006

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:

Electricity, natural gas, crude oil or petroleum products

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 232, ISIC rev 3.1 4010, ISIC rev 3.1 4020, CPC
7131, CPC 7422, CPC 887 (other than advisory and consulting

1425

services)
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the production, transmission and distribution of
electricity, the manufacturing of gas, the pipeline transportation
of fuels, wholesale services of electricity, retailing services of
electricity and non-bottled gas, and services incidental to
electricity and natural gas distribution.
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the cross-border supply of storage and warehousing
services of fuels transported through pipelines (natural gas).
The activities of electricity transmission and distribution are
carried out through exclusive concessions of public service.
Concessions relating to the transmission, distribution and
underground storage of natural gas and the reception, storage and
regasification terminal of LNG are awarded through contracts
concession, following public calls for tenders.
These concessions for electricity and gas sectors are assigned
only to limited companies with their headquarters and effective
management in Portugal.

Existing Measures:

Decree-Law 230/2012 and Decree-Law 231/2012, 26 October Natural Gas
Decree-Law 215-A/2012, and Decree-Law 215-B/2012, 8
October - Electricity
Decree-Law 31/2006, 15 February – Crude oil/Petroleum
products

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment

1426

For passenger transportation, an economic needs test is applied
to the supply of limousine services. Main criteria: number of and
impact on existing establishments, population density,
geographical spread, impact on traffic conditions and creation of
new employment.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Other services

Sub-Sector:

Funeral, cremation and undertaking services

Industry Classification:

CPC 97030

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Portugal reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to funeral, cremation and undertaking services. The
private management and operation of cemeteries is carried out
under a public concession.

Existing Measures:

Decree-Law 109/2010, 14 October 2010
Law 13/2011, 29 April 2011
***

1427

Reservations applicable in Romania
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Research and development services

Industry Classification:

CPC 851, CPC 852, CPC 853

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Romania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the cross-border supply of research and
development services.

Existing Measures:

Governmental Ordinance no. 6 / 2011
Order of Minister of Education and Research no. 3548 / 2006
Governmental Decision no. 134 / 2011

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Romania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Romania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

1428

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Romania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Romania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded primary,
secondary, higher, and adult education services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
1429

Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment
Romania reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded social services.

Existing Measures:
***

1430

Reservations applicable in the Slovak Republic
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:

Acquisition of real estate

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment
Foreign companies or natural persons may not acquire agricultural
and forest land outside the border of the built-up area of a
municipality and some other land (e.g. natural resources, lakes,
rivers, public roads etc.).

Existing Measures:

Act 202/1995, the Foreign Exchange Act, art. 19
Act 229/1991 on Laws on Adjustment of ownership relations to
Land

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Slovak Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the establishment of placement services of
office support personnel.
The Slovak Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the supply of executive search services and
supply services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

1431

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Slovak Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923 other than CPC 92310, CPC 924

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
EEA residency requirement for providers of all privately funded
education services other than post-secondary technical and
vocational education services.
An economic needs test may apply, the number of schools being
established may be limited by local authorities.
In the Slovak Republic, the majority of the members of the board
of directors of an establishment providing education services
must be nationals of the Slovak Republic.

Existing Measures:

Act 245/2008 on education

1432

Act 131/2002 on Universities, arts. 2, 47, 49a
Act 596/2003 on State Administration in Education, art. 16

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Hospital services
Ambulance services
Residential health services other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9311, CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The Slovak Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the supply of privately funded hospital,
ambulance, and residential health services other than hospital
services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The Slovak Republic reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the supply of privately funded social
services.

Existing Measures:

1433

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance-related services

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Financial Services
Foreign nationals may establish an insurance company in the
form of a joint stock company or may conduct insurance
business through their branches having a registered office in the
Slovak Republic. The authorisation in both cases is subject to the
evaluation of supervisory authority.

Existing Measures:

Act 8/2008 on Insurance

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Measures:

Act 566/2001 on Securities
Act 483/2001 on Banks

Description:

Financial Services
Investment services in the Slovak Republic can be provided by
management companies which have the legal form of joint-stock
company with equity capital according to the law (no branches).

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Energy

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 4010, ISIC rev 3.1 4020, ISIC rev 3.1 4030, CPC
7131
1434

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
An authorisation is required for the production, transmission and
distribution of electricity, manufacture of gas and distribution of
gaseous fuels, production and distribution of steam and hot
water, pipeline transportation of fuels, wholesale and retail of
electricity, steam and hot water, and services incidental to energy
distribution. An economic needs test is applied and the
application may be denied only if the market is saturated.
For all these activities, an authorisation may only be granted to a
natural person with permanent residency in a Member State of
the EU or the EEA or a juridical person established in the EU or
the EEA.

Existing Measures:

Act 51/1988 on Mining, art. 4a
Act 569/2007 on Geological Activity, art. 5
Act 251/2012 on Energy, arts. 6, 7
Act 657/2004 on Thermal Energy, art. 5

Sector:

Transportation
Fishing
Aquaculture

Sub-Sector:

Water transportation
Services incidental to fishing

Industry Classification:

CPC 722

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Cross-border Trade in Services
In the Slovak Republic, foreign investors must have their
principal office in the Slovak Republic in order to apply for a
licence enabling them to provide a service.

Existing Measures:

1435

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
For freight transportation, an economic needs test is applied.
Main criteria: local demand.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Rail transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7111, CPC 7112

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures that are taken under existing or future agreements, and
which regulate traffic rights and operating conditions, and the
supply of transport services in the territory of Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic and Slovakia and between the countries
concerned.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Road transport

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7121, CPC 7122, CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures that are taken under existing or future agreements, and
which reserve or limit the supply of transport services and
specify operating conditions, including transit permits or
1436

preferential road taxes of a transport services into, in, across and
out of Slovakia to the contracting parties concerned.
Existing Measures:
***

1437

Reservations applicable in Slovenia
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services
Supply services of office support personnel

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202, CPC 87203

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Slovenia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the establishment of placement services of office
support personnel.
Slovenia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of executive search services and supply
services of office support personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Slovenia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with regard to the supply of security services.
Licensing and authorisation requirements may exist. Residency
or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements
may exist.

Existing Measures:

1438

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:

Primary education services
Secondary education services
Higher education services

Industry Classification:

CPC 921, CPC 922, CPC 923

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Slovenia reserves the right to require establishment and to
restrict the cross-border supply of privately funded primary
education services.
The majority of the members of the board of directors of an
establishment providing privately funded secondary or higher
education services must be Slovenian nationals.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Ambulance services

Industry Classification:

CPC 93192

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Slovenia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure
with respect to the supply of privately funded ambulance
services.

Existing Measures:

1439

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Slovenia reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services.

Existing Measures:
***

1440

Reservations applicable in Spain
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Executive search
Placement services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87201, CPC 87202

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Spain reserves the right to restrict the number of suppliers of
executive search services.
Spain reserves the right to restrict the number of suppliers of
placement services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Security services

Industry Classification:

CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304, CPC 87305, CPC 87309

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The supply of security services by a foreign provider on a crossborder basis is not allowed.
Access through Sociedades Anonimas, Sociedades de
Responsabilidad Limitada, Sociedades Anonimas Laborales and
Sociedades Cooperativas only.
Nationality condition for specialised personnel.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance

1441

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Cross-Border supply of financial services

Description:

Financial Services
Residence is required, or alternatively to have two years of
experience, for the actuarial profession.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Spain reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the supply of privately funded social services other
than services relating to Convalescent and Rest Houses and Old
People's Homes.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Transport

Sub-Sector:

Road transport: passenger transportation, freight transportation,
international truck transport services

Industry Classification:

CPC 712

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
For passenger transportation, an economic needs test applies to
services provided under CPC 7122. Main criteria: local demand.

1442

An economic needs test applies for intercity bussing services.
Main criteria: number of and impact on existing establishments,
population density, geographical spread, impact on traffic
conditions and creation of new employment.
Existing Measures:

Sector:

Road transport (freight)

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 7123

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Authorisation for the establishment of a commercial presence in
Spain may be refused to service suppliers, whose country of
origin does not accord effective market access to service
suppliers of Spain.

Existing Measures:

Ley 16/1987, de 30 de julio, de Ordenación de los
Transportes Terrestres
***

1443

Reservations applicable in Sweden
Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Sweden reserves the right to adopt or maintain discriminatory
requirements for founders, senior management and boards of
directors when new forms of legal association are incorporated
into Swedish law.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

All sectors

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:
Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures taken by Denmark, Sweden and Finland aimed at
promoting Nordic cooperation, such as:
(a) financial support to research and development (R&D)
projects (the Nordic Industrial Fund);
(b) funding of feasibility studies for international projects (the
Nordic Fund for Project Exports); and
(c) financial assistance to companies83 utilizing environmental
technology (the Nordic Environment Finance Corporation).
This reservation is without prejudice to the exclusion of
procurement by a Party, subsidies, or governmental support for
trade in services in Art. 8.14.5(a) and (b), and Art. 9.2.2(f) and
(g) respectively.

Existing Measures:

83

Applies to East European companies, which are cooperating with one or more Nordic companies.

1444

Sector:

Mining and quarrying, manufacturing of electricity, gas and
water supply

Sub-Sector:

Nuclear based electricity generation
Processing of nuclear fuel

Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 1200, 2330, part of 4010

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
Sweden reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to the processing of nuclear fuel and nuclear-based
electricity generation.

Existing Measures:

The Swedish Environmental Code (1998:808)
Law on Nuclear Technology Activities (1984:3)

Sector:

Distribution services

Sub-Sector:

Retail sales of pharmaceuticals and retail sales of medical and
orthopaedic goods and other services supplied by pharmacists

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
The Swedish monopoly on retail sales of pharmaceuticals was
abandoned on 1 July 2009. Given that the opening of the market
is recent and involves new modes of services delivery, Sweden
reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with respect
to retail sales of pharmaceutical goods and the supply of
pharmaceutical goods to the general public.

Existing Measures:

Law on trade with pharmaceuticals (2009:336)
1445

Regulation on trade with pharmaceuticals (2009:659)
The Swedish Medical Products Agency has adopted further
regulations, the details can be found at (LVFS 2009:9)
http://www.lakemedelsverket.se/upload/lvfs/LVFS_2009-9.pdf

Sector:

Education services

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 92

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Sweden reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to educational services suppliers that are approved by
public authorities to provide education.
This reservation applies to privately funded educational services
suppliers with some form of State support, inter alia educational
service suppliers recognised by the State, educational services
suppliers under State supervision or education which entitles to
study support.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Recycling

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

ISIC rev 3.1 37

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Sweden reserves the right to limit the number of suppliers of
privately funded recycling services at the level of local
government, by establishing or maintaining monopolies, or
granting a concession or exclusive rights on a non-discriminatory
basis to a service provider or service providers. The limitation on
market access reflects the application of the EU reservation
1446

relating to public utilities.
Existing Measures:

The Environmental Code (1998:808)
SFS 1994:1205 Förordning (1994:1205) om producentansvar för
returpapper
SFS 2000:208 Förordning (2000:208) om producentansvar för
glödlampor och vissa belysningsarmaturer
SFS 2005:209 Förordning (2005:209) om producentansvar för
elektriska och elektroniska produkter
SFS 1997:185 Förordning (1997:185) om producentansvar för
förpackningar
SFS 1994:1236 Förordning (1994:1236) om producentansvar för
däck
SFS 1993:1154 Förordning (1993:1154) om producentansvar för
glasförpackningar och förpackningar av wellpapp
SFS 2007:185 Förordning (2007:185) om producentansvar för
bilar
SFS 2007:193 Förordning (2007:193) om producentansvar för
vissa radioaktiva produkter och herrelösa strålkällor
SFS 2006:1273 Förordning (2006:1273) om producentansvar för
förpackningar
SFS 2009:1031 Förordning (2009:1031) om producentansvar för
läkemedel

Sector:

Waste management

Sub-Sector:

Management of waste from households and waste related to
producer responsibilities

Industry Classification:

CPC 9402

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Sweden reserves the right to limit the number of suppliers of
privately funded waste management services at the level of local
government, by establishing or maintaining monopolies, or
granting a concession or exclusive rights on a non-discriminatory
basis to a service provider or service providers. The limitation on
market access reflects the application of the EU reservation
relating to public utilities.

1447

Existing Measures:

The Environmental Code (1998:808)
SFS 1994:1205 Förordning (1994:1205) om producentansvar för
returpapper
SFS 2000:208 Förordning (2000:208) om producentansvar för
glödlampor och vissa belysningsarmaturer
SFS 2005:209 Förordning (2005:209) om producentansvar för
elektriska och elektroniska produkter
SFS 1997:185 Förordning (1997:185) om producentansvar för
förpackningar
SFS 1994:1236 Förordning (1994:1236) om producentansvar för
däck
SFS 1993:1154 Förordning (1993:1154) om producentansvar för
glasförpackningar och förpackningar av wellpapp
SFS 2007:185 Förordning (2007:185) om producentansvar för
bilar
SFS 2007:193 Förordning (2007:193) om producentansvar för
vissa radioaktiva produkter och herrelösa strålkällor
SFS 2006:1273 Förordning (2006:1273) om producentansvar för
förpackningar
SFS 2009:1031 Förordning (2009:1031) om producentansvar för
läkemedel

Sector:

Maritime transport

Sub-Sector:

Cabotage

Industry Classification:

CPC 7211, CPC 7212

Type of Reservation:

Most-favoured-nation treatment

Description:

Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services
Measures may be taken on a reciprocal basis allowing vessels
from Canada under the flag of Canada to operate cabotage traffic
in Sweden in so far as Canada and its provinces and territories
allow vessels registered under the flag of Sweden to operate
cabotage traffic in Canada. The specific aim of this reservation
depends on the content of possible mutually agreed future
agreement between Canada and Sweden.

Existing Measures:

1448

Sector:

Business services
Auxiliary services to rail and land transport

Sub-Sector:

Maintenance and repair of rail and road transport equipment and
parts thereof

Industry Classification:

CPC 6112, CPC 6122, part of CPC 8867, part of CPC 8868

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
In Sweden, maintenance and repair services of rail and road
transport equipment are subject to an economic needs test when
an investor intends to establish its own terminal infrastructure
facilities. Main criteria: space and capacity constraints.

Existing Measures:

Planning and Building Act (2010:900)

Sector:

Other services not included elsewhere

Sub-Sector:

Funeral, cremation and undertaking services

Industry Classification:

CPC 9703

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
Sweden reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure with
respect to funeral, cremation and undertaking services

Existing Measures:
***

1449

Reservations applicable in the United Kingdom
Sector:

Business services

Sub-Sector:

Auditing services

Industry Classification:

CPC 86211, CPC 86212 other than accounting services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The United Kingdom reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the cross-border supply of auditing
services.

Existing Measures:

Companies Act 2006

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Medical services

Industry Classification:

CPC 93121, CPC 93122

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Description:

Investment
Establishment for doctors under the National Health Service is
subject to medical manpower planning.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Ambulance services
Residential health facilities services other than hospital services

Industry Classification:

CPC 93192, CPC 93193

Type of Reservation:

Market access

1450

National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors
Description:

Investment
The United Kingdom reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the supply of privately funded
ambulance services and residential health facilities services other
than hospital services.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Health services

Sub-Sector:

Health-related professional services, including medical and
dental services as well as services by psychologists; midwives
services
Services by nurses, physiotherapists and paramedical personnel
Retail sales of pharmaceuticals and of medical and orthopaedic
goods, and other services supplied by pharmacists

Industry Classification:

CPC 63211, part of CPC 85201, CPC 9312, part of CPC 93191

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Description:

Cross-Border Trade in Services
The United Kingdom reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure requiring the establishment of suppliers and restricting
the cross-border supply of health-related professional services
by service suppliers not physically present in the territory of the
UK, including medical and dental services as well as services by
psychologists; midwives
services; services
by
nurses,
physiotherapists and paramedical personnel; the retail sales of
pharmaceuticals and of medical and orthopaedic goods, and
other services supplied by pharmacists.

Existing Measures:

Sector:

Social services

1451

Sub-Sector:
Industry Classification:

CPC 933

Type of Reservation:

Market access
National treatment
Performance requirements
Senior management and boards of directors

Description:

Investment
The United Kingdom reserves the right to adopt or maintain any
measure with respect to the supply of privately funded social
services other than services relating to Convalescent and Rest
Houses and Old People's Homes.

Existing Measures:
***

1452

ANNEX III
Schedule of Canada
Explanatory notes
1.

The Schedule of Canada to this Annex sets out:
(a)

headnotes that limit or clarify the commitments of Canada with respect to the
obligations described in subparagraphs (b) and (c);

(b)

in Section A, the reservations taken by Canada, pursuant to Articles 13.10.1
and 13.10.2 (Reservations and exceptions), with respect to an existing measure
that does not conform with obligations imposed by:
(i)

Article 13.3 (National treatment);

(ii)

Article 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment);

(iii) Article 13.6 (Market access);
(iv) Article 13.7 (Cross-border supply of financial services); or
(v)
(c)

2.

in Section B, the reservations taken by Canada, pursuant to Article 13.10.3
(Reservations and exceptions), for measures Canada may adopt or maintain
that do not conform with obligations imposed by Articles 13.3 (National
treatment), 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 13.6 (Market access), 13.7
(Cross-border supply of financial services), or 13.8 (Senior management and
boards of directors).

Each reservation in Section A sets out the following elements:
(a)

Sector refers to the general sector in which the reservation is taken;

(b)

Sub-Sector refers to the specific sector in which the reservation is taken;

(c)

Type of Reservation specifies the obligation referred to in sub-paragraph 1(b)
for which the reservation is taken;

(d)

Level of Government indicates the level of government maintaining the
measure for which the reservation is taken;

(e)

Measures identifies the laws, regulations or other measures, as qualified,
where indicated, by the Description element, for which the reservation is
taken. A measure cited in the Measures element:

(f)

3.

Article 13.8 (Senior management and boards of directors);

(i)

means the measure as amended, continued or renewed as of the date of
entry into force of this Agreement; and

(ii)

includes a subordinate measure adopted or maintained under the
authority of and consistent with the measure; and

Description sets out references, if any, for liberalisation on the date of entry
into force of this Agreement pursuant to other sections of Canada’s Schedule to
this Annex, and the remaining non-conforming aspects of the existing
measures for which the reservation is taken.

Each reservation in Section B sets out the following elements:
1453

4.

(a)

Sector refers to the general sector in which the reservation is taken;

(b)

Sub-Sector refers to the specific sector in which the reservation is taken;

(c)

Type of Reservation specifies the obligation referred to in sub-paragraph 1(c)
for which the reservation is taken;

(d)

Level of Government indicates the level of government maintaining the
measure for which the reservation is taken; and

(e)

Description sets out the scope of the sectors, subsectors, or activities covered
by the reservation.

In the interpretation of a reservation in Section A, all elements of the reservation
shall be considered. A reservation shall be interpreted in the light of the relevant
provisions of the Chapter against which the reservation is taken. To the extent that:
(a)

the Measures element is qualified by a specific reference in the Description
element, the Measures element as so qualified shall prevail over all other
elements; and

(b)

the Measures element is not so qualified, the Measures element shall prevail
over all other elements, unless any discrepancy between the Measures element
and the other elements considered in their totality is so substantial and material
that it would be unreasonable to conclude that the Measures element should
prevail, in which case the other elements shall prevail to the extent of that
discrepancy.

5.

In the interpretation of a reservation in Section B, all elements of the reservation
shall be considered. The Description element shall prevail over all other elements.

6.

Where Canada maintains a measure that requires that a service supplier be a citizen,
permanent resident, or resident of its territory as a condition to the supply of a
service in its territory, a reservation for that measure taken with respect to Articles
13.3 (National treatment), 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation-treatment), 13.6 (Market
access), 13.7 (Cross-border supply of financial services), and 13.8 (Senior
management and boards of directors), shall operate as a reservation with respect to
Articles 8.4 (Market access), 8.5 ( Performance requirements), 8.6 (National
treatment), 8.7 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), and 8.8 (Senior management and
boards of directors) to the extent of that measure.

7.

A reservation for a measure that requires a service supplier be a natural person,
citizen, permanent resident, or resident of its territory as a condition to the supply of
a financial service in its territory taken with respect to Article 13.7 (Cross-border
supply of financial services) shall operate as a reservation with respect to Articles
13.3 (National treatment), 13.4 (Most-favoured-nation treatment), 13.6 (Market
access), and 13.8 (Senior management and boards of ‎srrectors), to the extent of that
measure.

1454

Headnotes
1.

Commitments under this Agreement, in the subsectors listed in this Schedule, are
undertaken subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in these headnotes and
in the Schedule below.

2.

The listing of a measure as a reservation in Section A or B does not mean that it
cannot otherwise be justified as a measure adopted or maintained for prudential
reasons pursuant to Article 13.16 (Prudential carve out).

3.

To clarify Canada’s commitment with respect to Article 13.6 (Market access),
juridical persons supplying financial services and constituted under the laws of
Canada are subject to non-discriminatory limitations on juridical form.84

4.

Article 13.10.1(c) (Reservations and exceptions) shall not apply to non-conforming
measures relating to Article 13.6.1(b) (Market access).

84

For example, partnerships and sole proprietorships with limited or unlimited liability are generally not
acceptable juridical forms for financial institutions in Canada. This headnote is not itself intended to
affect, or otherwise limit, a choice by an investor of the other Party between branches or subsidiaries.

1455

Schedule of Canada
SECTION A
Reservations applicable in Canada
(applicable in all Provinces and Territories)
Reservation IIIA-C-1
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

All

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:
Measures:

National
Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c.46, ss. 159, 749
Insurance Companies Act, S,C, 1991, c. 47, ss. 167, 796
Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c. 45, s. 163
Foreign Institutions Subject to the Canadian Residency
Requirements Regulations (Insurance Companies), S.O.R./2003185
Foreign Institutions Subject to the Canadian Residency
Requirements Regulations (Trust and Loan Companies),
S.O.R./2003-186
Cooperative Credit Associations Act, S.C. 1991, c. 48, s. 169

Description:
A minimum of one half of the directors of a federally-regulated financial institution that is a
subsidiary of a foreign institution, and a majority of the directors of any other federallyregulated financial institution must be Canadian citizens ordinarily resident in Canada or
permanent residents ordinarily resident in Canada.85

85

For greater certainty, a holding company established under federal domestic law is a financial
institution for the purposes of Article 13.1.

1456

Reservation IIIA-C-2
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c.46, s. 524

Description:
In order to establish a bank branch, a foreign bank must be a bank in the jurisdiction under
whose laws it is incorporated.

1457

Reservation IIIA-C-3
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c.46, s. 540
Sales or Trades (Authorized Foreign Banks) Regulations,
S.O.R./2000-52

Description:
A lending bank branch in respect of its business in Canada may only accept a deposit or
otherwise borrow money by means of a financial instrument from, or guarantee a security or
accept a bill of exchange issued by a person that is sold to or traded with:
(a) a financial institution (other than a foreign bank); or
(b) a foreign bank that:
(i) is a bank according to the laws of the jurisdiction under whose laws it was
incorporated or in any jurisdiction in which it carries on business;
(ii) provides financial services and has a name that includes the word “bank,”
“banque,” “banking” or “bancaire”; and
(iii) is regulated as a bank or as a deposit-taking institution according to the
jurisdiction under whose laws it was incorporated or in any jurisdiction in which
it carries on business,
if the financial instrument, security or bill of exchange cannot be subsequently sold or traded.

1458

Reservation IIIA-C-4
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

All

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c.45
Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c.46
Cooperative Credit Associations Act, S.C. 1991, c.48
Insurance Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c. 47

Description:
Federal laws do not permit a trust and loan company, credit union, or fraternal benefit society in
Canada to be established through branches of corporations organised under a foreign country’s
law.

1459

Reservation IIIA-C-5
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

All

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Measures:

Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c. 45, ss. 510, 522.16, 524
Insurance Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c. 47, ss. 574, 581

Description:
1. A bank branch must be established directly under the authorised foreign bank incorporated in
the jurisdiction where the authorised foreign bank principally carries on business.
2. A foreign entity authorised to insure, in Canada, risks must be established directly under the
foreign insurance company incorporated in the jurisdiction where the foreign insurance
company, directly or through a subsidiary, principally carries on business.

1460

Reservations applicable in Alberta
Reservation IIIA-PT-1
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. I-13

Description:
Insurance services in Alberta can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Alberta laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges;

(f)

fraternal societies; or

(g)

special brokers.

1461

Reservation IIIA-PT-2
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

National Treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. I-13

Description:
Subsidiaries of foreign insurance corporations must be federally-authorised.

1462

Reservation IIIA-PT-3
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance
Intermediation of insurance contracts related to maritime
transport and commercial aviation and space launching and
freight (including satellites), and to reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. I-3

Description:
1.
A fee payable to the province of 50 per cent of the premium paid, and regulatory
notification, are required on insurance of risks in the province by an unlicensed insurer, unless
such insurance is placed by a special broker licensed in Alberta.
2.
For greater certainty, a special broker licensed in Alberta is not required to be resident in
Alberta and a licensed insurer is not required to have a commercial presence in Alberta.

1463

Reservation IIIA-PT-4
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Loan and Trust Corporations Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. L-20
Loan and Trust Corporations Regulation, Alta. Reg. 171/1992

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Alberta regime an entity must be a body
corporate to which the Loan and Trust Corporations Act applies.

1464

Reservation IIIA-PT-5
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National Treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Loan and Trust Corporations Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. L-20
Loan and Trust Corporations Regulation, Alta. Reg. 171/1992

Description:
At least three quarters of the directors of a trust and loan company in Alberta must be ordinarily
resident in Canada.

1465

Reservation IIIA-PT-6
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market Access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Credit Union Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. C-32
Credit Union Regulation, Alta. Reg. 249/1989

Description:
A credit union must be incorporated in Alberta.

1466

Reservation IIIA-PT-7
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Credit Union Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. C-32
Credit Union Regulation, Alta. Reg. 249/1989

Description:
Directors of credit unions in Alberta must be Canadian citizens or permanent residents of
Canada and three-quarters must at all times be ordinarily resident in Alberta.

1467

Reservation IIIA-PT-8
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Advisory and auxiliary financial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-4

Description:
Where an advisor provides advice in Alberta such services must be supplied through a
commercial presence in Alberta.

1468

Reservation IIIA-PT-9
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-4, s.75

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers that are not resident or
registered in Alberta.

1469

Reservation IIIA-PT-10
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-4

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1470

Reservations applicable in British Columbia
Reservation IIIA-PT-11
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups thereof
Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Financial Institutions Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 141

Description:
For provincially-incorporated trust companies, insurance companies and credit unions, the
majority of directors must be ordinarily resident in Canada and at least one director must be
ordinarily resident in British Columbia.

1471

Reservation IIIA-PT-12
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Financial Institutions Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 141, ss.75-76

Description:
Insurance services in British Columbia can be provided only through:
(a)
a corporation incorporated under British Columbia laws;
(b)
an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;
(c)
a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;
(d)
an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds; or
(e)
reciprocal insurance exchanges.

1472

Reservation IIIA-PT-13
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance, reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Financial Institutions Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 141, ss. 48 through
51 with respect to trust, insurance, and holding companies

Description:
Where any person controls or will control 10 per cent or more of the votes of a company,
incorporation, share acquisition or application for business authorisation is subject to approval
by the financial institutions commission.

1473

Reservation IIIA-PT-14
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Financial Services Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 141

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in British Columbia.

1474

Reservation IIIA-PT-15
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
All payment and money transmission services – trust and loan
companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Financial Institutions Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 141, ss. 48 through
51

Description:
Where any person controls or will control 10 per cent or more of the votes of a company,
incorporation, share acquisition or application for business authorisation is subject to approval
by the financial institutions commission.

1475

Reservation IIIA-PT-16
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 418

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are neither
resident nor registered in British Columbia.

1476

Reservation IIIA-PT-17
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 418
National Instrument 81-102 Investment Funds, B.C. Reg.
20/2000, Part 6

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if the sub-custodian has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100
million.

1477

Reservations applicable in Manitoba
Reservation IIIA-PT-18
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Insurance Act, C.C.S.M. c. 140

Description:
Insurance services in Manitoba can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Manitoba laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction ;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges;

(f)

fraternal societies; or

(g)

special brokers.

1478

Reservation IIIA-PT-19
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C225

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Manitoba regime an entity must be a body
corporate to which PART XXIV of The Corporations Act applies.

1479

Reservation IIIA-PT-20
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C225

Description:
The direct or indirect acquisition of Canadian-controlled companies by non-residents is
restricted to 10 per cent individually and 25 per cent collectively.

1480

Reservation IIIA-PT-21
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C225, s. 346(1) and (2)

Description:
A non-resident shareholder may not vote, or cause to be voted, his or her or its shares, unless the
non-resident is the registered shareholder of the shares.

1481

Reservation IIIA-PT-22
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Corporations Act, C.C.S.M. c. C225, s. 321(6)

Description:
A majority of directors of provincially incorporated trust and loan companies must be residents
of Canada.

1482

Reservation IIIA-PT-23
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Credit Unions and Caisses Populaires Act, C.C.S.M. c.
C301

Description:
1.

A credit union or caisse populaire must be incorporated in Manitoba.

2.
The purpose of a credit union is to provide financial services on a cooperative basis to its
members, and for such services to be directed or controlled primarily by residents of Manitoba.
The purpose of a caisse populaire is to provide financial services in the French language on a
cooperative basis to its members, and for such services to be directed or controlled by Frenchspeaking individuals who are resident in Manitoba.
3.
“Resident in Manitoba” is defined as an individual legally entitled to be in Canada, has
made his or her home in Manitoba, and is physically present in Manitoba for at least six months
in a year. A reference in the English version of the The Credit Unions and Caisses Populaires
Act to a credit union includes a caisse populaire, and a reference in the French version of the Act
to a caisse populaire includes a credit union.

1483

Reservation IIIA-PT-24
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Credit Unions and Caisses Populaires Act, C.C.S.M. c.
C301

Description:
A director of a credit union or caisse populaire must be a resident of Canada.

1484

Reservation IIIA-PT-25
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Community bonds corporations

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Agricultural Societies Act, C.C.S.M. c. A30

Description:
A director of a community bonds corporation must be a resident of Manitoba.

1485

Reservation IIIA-PT-26
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Securities Act, C.C.S.M. c. S50

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in Manitoba.

1486

Reservation IIIA-PT-27
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures and advisory and
auxiliary financial services – dealers, brokers, advisers

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Securities Act, C.C.S.M. c. S50

Description:
1.
Where the applicant is a corporation, at least one officer or director must meet the “usual
residence qualification”, and where the applicant is a partnership, at least one partner or member
who is an individual must meet the “usual residence qualification”.
2.
The “usual residence qualification” requires the applicant to be resident in Manitoba at
the date of the application and to have been resident in Canada for at least one year immediately
before the date of the application, or to have been registered under the securities laws of another
Canadian jurisdiction in which the applicant last resided and to have been so registered for at
least one year immediately before the date of the application.

1487

Reservation IIIA-PT-28
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading for own account and for account of customers: custodial
services; trading in securities and commodity futures – persons;
securities dealers and brokers; trading in securities and
commodity futures; advisory and auxiliary financial services;
dealers, brokers, advisors

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Securities Act, C.C.S.M. c. S50

Description:
An individual applicant for registration must be a resident of Canada for a period of at least
one year prior to the application and a resident of the province in which he or she wishes to
operate at the date of application.

1488

Reservation IIIA-PT-29
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Securities Act, C.C.S.M. c. S50

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1489

Reservations applicable in New Brunswick
Reservation IIIA-PT-30
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.N.B. 1973, c. I-12

Description:
Insurance services in New Brunswick can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under New Brunswick laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds; or

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges.

1490

Reservation IIIA-PT-31
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Loan and Trust Companies Act, S.N.B. 1987, c. L-11.2

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the New Brunswick regime an entity must be a
body corporate to which the Loan and Trust Companies Act applies.

1491

Reservation IIIA-PT-32
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Loan and Trust Companies Act, S.N.B. 1987, c. L-11.2

Description:
At least two of the directors of a trust and loan company must be resident in New Brunswick.

1492

Reservation IIIA-PT-33
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Loan and Trust Companies Act, S.N.B. 1987, c. L-11.2

Description:
Incorporation or registration of a trust and loan company in New Brunswick will be refused
unless authorities are satisfied that there exists a public benefit and advantage for an additional
corporation.

1493

Reservation IIIA-PT-34
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Securities Act, S.N.B. 2004, c. S-5.5

Description:
There is a requirement for an individual or firm to register in order to trade through dealers and
brokers that are not resident or registered in New Brunswick.

1494

Reservation IIIA-PT-35
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Credit Unions Act, S.N.B.1994, c. C-32.

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in New Brunswick.

1495

Reservation IIIA-PT-36
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Community bonds corporations

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Securities Act, S.N.B. 2004, c. S-5.5

Description:
A director of a Community Bonds corporation must be a resident of New Brunswick.

1496

Reservation IIIA-PT-37
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Securities Act, S.N.B. 2004, c. S-5.5

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1497

Reservations applicable in Newfoundland and Labrador
Reservation IIIA-PT-38
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Insurance Adjusters, Agents and Brokers Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c.
I-9

Description:
Insurance services in Newfoundland and Labrador can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Newfoundland and Labrador laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges;

(f)

fraternal societies;

(g)

special brokers;

(h)

sororal societies; or

(i)

mutual benefits societies.

1498

Reservation IIIA-PT-39
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Insurance Companies Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. I-10

Description:
The purchase of reinsurance services by an insurer, other than a life insurer or a reinsurer, from
a non-resident reinsurer, is limited to no more than 25 per cent of the risks undertaken by the
insurer purchasing the reinsurance.

1499

Reservation IIIA-PT-40
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Corporations Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, C-36
Trust and Loan Corporations Act, S.N.L. 2007, c. T-9.1

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Newfoundland and Labrador regime an entity
must be a body corporate to which the Trust and Loan Corporations Act applies.

1500

Reservation IIIA-PT-41
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Credit Union Act 2009, S.N.L. 2009, c. C-37.2

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in Newfoundland and Labrador.

1501

Reservation IIIA-PT-42
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. S-13

Description:
In certain restricted circumstances, the Superintendent of Securities may refuse registration:
(a) to an individual, or
(b) to a person or company,
if the individual, or any director or officer of the person or company, has not been a resident
of Canada for at least one year immediately prior to the date of application for registration.

1502

Reservation IIIA-PT-43
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. S-13

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in Newfoundland and Labrador.

1503

Reservation IIIA-PT-44
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. S-13

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$100 million.

1504

Reservations applicable in the Northwest Territories
Reservation IIIA-PT-45
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.N.W.T. 1988, c. I-4

Description:
Insurance services can be provided in the Northwest Territories only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Northwest Territory laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges; or

(f)

fraternal societies.

1505

Reservation IIIA-PT-46
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, S.N.W.T. (Nu) 1996, c. 19

Description:
Federal or provincial incorporation of a trust and loan company is required in the Northwest
Territories.

1506

Reservation IIIA-PT-47
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Credit Union Act, R.S.N.W.T. (Nu) 1988, c. C-23

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in the Northwest Territories.

1507

Reservation IIIA-PT-48
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.W.T. (Nu) 1988, c. S-5

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in the Northwest Territories.

1508

Reservation IIIA-PT-49
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Securities Act, S.N.W.T. 2008, c. 10

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1509

Reservations applicable in Nova Scotia
Reservation IIIA-PT-50
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 231
Licensing of Insurers Regulations, N.S. Reg. 142/90 or any other
subsidiary measures made thereto

Description:
Insurance services in Nova Scotia can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Nova Scotia laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges;

(f)
(g)

fraternal societies;
special brokers;

(h)

sororal societies; or

(i)

mutual benefits societies.

1510

Reservation IIIA-PT-51
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Intermediation of insurance contracts related to maritime
transport and commercial aviation and space launching and
freight (including satellites), and to reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 231

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in Nova Scotia.

1511

Reservation IIIA-PT-52
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.N.S. 1991, c. 7 and any
subsidiary measures made thereto

Description:
Incorporation or registration of a trust and loan company in Nova Scotia will be refused unless
authorities are satisfied that there exists a public benefit and advantage for an additional
corporation.

1512

Reservation IIIA-PT-53
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.N.S. 1991, c. 7 and any
subsidiary measures made thereto

Description:
At least two of the directors of a provincial company must be ordinarily resident in Nova Scotia
and a majority of the directors must be ordinarily resident in Canada.

1513

Reservation IIIA-PT-54
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.N.S. 1991, c. 7

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Nova Scotia regime an entity must be a body
corporate to which the Trust and Loan Companies Act applies.

1514

Reservation IIIA-PT-55
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Credit Union Act, R.S.N.S. 1994, c. 4

Description:
A director of a credit union in Nova Scotia must be a Canadian citizen.

1515

Reservation IIIA-PT-56
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Credit Union Act, R.S.N.S. 1994, c. 4

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in Nova Scotia.

1516

Reservation IIIA-PT-57
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Residential mortgages services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Mortgage Brokers and Lenders Registration Act, R.S.N.S. 1989,
c. 291 and any subsidiary measure made thereto

Description:
A mortgage broker must incorporate under the laws of Canada or Nova Scotia.

1517

Reservation IIIA-PT-58
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Residential mortgages services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Mortgage Brokers and Lenders Registration Act, R.S.N.S. 1989,
c. 291 and any subsidiary measure made thereto

Description:
A mortgage broker must be a resident of Nova Scotia.

1518

Reservation IIIA-PT-59
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 418

Description:
In certain restricted circumstances, the Superintendent of Securities may refuse registration in
Nova Scotia:
(a) to an individual, or
(b) to a person or company,
if the individual, or any director or officer of the person or company, has not been a resident of
Canada for at least one year immediately prior to the date of application for registration.

1519

Reservation IIIA-PT-60
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Advisory and auxiliary financial services and asset management

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 418

Description:
The establishment must be managed by a resident of Nova Scotia.

1520

Reservation IIIA-PT-61
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Advisory and auxiliary financial services

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 418

Description:
Where an advisor provides advice in Nova Scotia such services must be supplied through a
commercial presence in Nova Scotia.

1521

Reservation IIIA-PT-62
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 418

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1522

Reservations applicable in Nunavut
Reservation IIIA-PT-63
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Nunavut

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. I-3

Description:
Insurance services in Nunavut can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Nunavut laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges; or

(f)

fraternal societies.

1523

Reservation IIIA-PT-64
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Nunavut

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, S.N.W.T. 1996, c. 19

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Nunavut regime, an entity must be a
corporation to which the Business Corporations Act applies.

1524

Reservation IIIA-PT-65
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Nunavut

Measures:

Credit Union Act, R.S.N.W.T. (Nu) 1988, c. C-23

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in Nunavut.

1525

Reservation IIIA-PT-66
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Nunavut

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.W.T. (Nu) 1998, c.10

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in Nunavut.

1526

Reservation IIIA-PT-67
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Nunavut

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.W.T. (Nu.) 1988, c. S-5

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1527

Reservations applicable in Ontario
Reservation IIIA-PT-68
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, s. 42

Description:
Insurance services in Ontario can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Ontario laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction; or

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges; or

(f)

fraternal societies.

1528

Reservation IIIA-PT-69
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services – services auxiliary to
insurance and pension funding

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, ss. 48 (3), 48 (7), 169(2)

Description:
Mutual insurance companies are subject to less onerous capital requirements if they are a
member of the Fire Mutuals Guarantee Fund. Any mutual insurance company can be a member
of the Fire Mutuals Guarantee Fund but membership is subject to the approval of the
Superintendent of Financial Services.

1529

Reservation IIIA-PT-70
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, s. 54

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in Ontario.

1530

Reservation IIIA-PT-71
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Loan and Trust Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.25, s. 31

Description:
Only a corporation incorporated under the federal Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c.
45 may apply for initial registration to carry on business as a loan corporation or as a trust
corporation in Ontario.

1531

Reservation IIIA-PT-72
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Credit Unions and Caisses Populaires Act, 1994, S.O. 1994, c.
11, s. 332

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in Ontario.

1532

Reservation IIIA-PT-73
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Financial intermediation services, other than insurance and
pension fund services
Credit unions and caisses populaires

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and board of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Credit Unions and Caisses Populaires Act, 1994, S.O. 1994, c.
11, ss. 23, 91, 160, 332

Description:
Only a natural person who is a member of the credit union, at least 18 years of age, and a
Canadian citizen or permanent resident or a person admitted to Canada for permanent residency
who is ordinarily resident in Canada, is eligible to be a director of a credit union.

1533

Reservation IIIA-PT-74
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Services auxiliary to financial intermediation other than
insurance and pension funding
Mortgage brokers

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Mortgage Brokerages, Lenders and Administrators Act, 2006,
S.O. 2006, c. 29
Mortgage Brokers and Agents: Licensing, O. Reg. 409/07

Description:
A mortgage broker or mortgage agent (both are occupations practised by a natural person) must
be a resident of Canada.

1534

Reservation IIIA-PT-75
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Services auxiliary to financial intermediation other than
insurance and pension funding
Mortgage brokers

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Mortgage Brokerages, Lenders and Administrators Act, 2006,
S.O. 2006, c. 29;
Mortgage Brokerages: Licensing, O. Reg. 408/07
Mortgage Administrators: Licensing, O. Reg. 411/07

Description:
A mortgage brokerage or a mortgage administrator (business entities) must be a corporation
incorporated in a Canadian jurisdiction, a partnership formed under the laws of a Canadian
jurisdiction, or a sole proprietor who is a resident of Canada.

1535

Reservation IIIA-PT-76
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Commodity Futures Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.20, ss. 22(1), 65
National Instrument 31-103 Registration, Exemptions and
Ongoing Registrant
National Instrument 33-109 Registration Requirements and
Related Matters

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in Ontario.

1536

Reservation IIIA-PT-77
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.5, s. 143
National Instrument 31-103 Registration, Exemptions and
Ongoing Registrant
National Instrument 81-102 Mutual Funds

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1537

Reservations applicable in Prince Edward Island
Reservation IIIA-PT-78
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. I-4, ss. 24, 26(5), 324

Description:
Insurance services in Prince Edward Island can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Prince Edward Island laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges; or

(f)

fraternal societies.

1538

Reservation IIIA-PT-79
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. I-4

Description:
Subsidiaries of foreign insurance corporations in Prince Edward Island must be federallyauthorised.

1539

Reservation IIIA-PT-80
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Trust and Fiduciary Companies Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. T-7.1,
ss. 26, 27
Extra-provincial Corporations Registration Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
c. E-14, s. 4

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Prince Edward Island regime an entity must be
a body corporate to which the Trust and Fiduciary Companies Act applies.

1540

Reservation IIIA-PT-81
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Credit Unions Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. C-29.1, ss. 2, 159

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in Prince Edward Island.

1541

Reservation IIIA-PT-82
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. S-3.1

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in Prince Edward Island.

1542

Reservation IIIA-PT-83
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. S-3.1

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1543

Reservations applicable in Québec
Reservation IIIA-PT-84
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

Loi modifiant la Loi concernant les Services de santé du Québec
et concernant SSQ, Mutuelle de gestion et SSQ, Société
d’assurance-vie inc., Q.L. 1993, c. 107

Description:
Upon any allotment or transfer of voting shares of the capital stock insurance company “SSQ,
Société d'assurance vie inc” or of the holding company “Groupe SSQ inc,” the minister may, if
the transfer confers control of the company to non-residents, ask such companies to prove that
the shares were offered in priority to Québec residents and subsidiarily to other Canadian
residents, but that no offer was made or was acceptable.

1544

Reservation IIIA-PT-85
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec,
C.Q.L.R., c. C-2

Description:
A minimum of three-quarters of the members of the board of directors must reside in Québec.

1545

Reservation IIIA-PT-86
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting insurance, C.Q.L.R., c. A-32
An Act respecting trust companies and savings companies,
C.Q.L.R., c. S-29.01

Description:
1.
Three-quarters of the directors of trust companies and savings companies must be
Canadian citizens.
2.
A majority of the directors of insurance companies, mutual insurance companies,
saving companies and trust companies, shall reside in Québec.
3.
The direct or indirect acquisition of Canadian-controlled savings companies or trust
companies by non-residents is restricted to 10 per cent individually and 25 per cent collectively.

1546

Reservation IIIA-PT-87
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting insurance, C.Q.L.R., c. A-32

Description:
1.
Every legal person not constituted under an Act of Québec which does not have its head
office in Québec shall, when applying for a licence, appoint a chief representative in Québec.
The representative must be a person in authority who is resident in Québec.
2.
Every legal person not constituted under an Act of Québec has, in respect of the
activities it carries on in Québec, the rights and obligations of an insurance company or mutual
association constituted under Acts of Québec as the case may be. It is also bound to comply
with its constituting Act if it is more restrictive.

1547

Reservation IIIA-PT-88
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting insurance, C.Q.L.R., c. A-32

Description:
Insurance services in Québec can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Québec statutes;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation; or

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds.

1548

Reservation IIIA-PT-89
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Intermediation of insurance contracts related to maritime
transport and commercial aviation and space launching and
freight (including satellites), and to reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the distribution of financial products and
services, C.Q.L.R., c. D-9.2

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in Québec.

1549

Reservation IIIA-PT-90
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting financial services cooperatives, C.Q.L.R., c.
C-67.3

Description:
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations, or groups thereof, must incorporate in
Québec.

1550

Reservation IIIA-PT-91
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance contracts relating to maritime shipping,
commercial aviation, space launching, freight (including
satellites) and goods in international transit

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting Insurance, C.Q.L.R., c. A-32

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in Québec.

1551

Reservation IIIA-PT-92
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting Insurance, C.Q.L.R., c. A-32

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in Québec.

1552

Reservation IIIA-PT-93
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

Regulation 31-103 respecting Registration Requirements,
Exceptions and Ongoing Registrant Obligations, C.Q.L.R., c. V1.1, r. 10
Securities Act, C.Q.L.R., c. V-1.1

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are neither
resident nor registered in Québec.

1553

Reservation IIIA-PT-94
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

Securities Act, C.Q.L.R., c. V-1.1
Regulation 31-103 respecting Registration Requirements,
Exemptions and Ongoing Registrant Obligations, C.Q.L.R., c.
V-1.1, r. 10
Regulation 81-102 respecting Mutual Funds, C.Q.L.R., c. V-1.1,
r. 39

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1554

Reservations applicable in Saskatchewan
Reservation IIIA-PT-95
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. S-26

Description:
Insurance services in Saskatchewan can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Saskatchewan laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is, an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges; or

(f)

fraternal societies.

1555

Reservation IIIA-PT-96
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. S-26

Description:
A fee payable to the province of 10 per cent of the premium is required on insurance of risks in
the province by unlicensed insurers.

1556

Reservation IIIA-PT-97
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997, S.S. 1997, c. T-22.2

Description:
Federal or provincial incorporation of a trust and loan company is required in Saskatchewan.

1557

Reservation IIIA-PT-98
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997, S.S. 1997, c. T-22.2

Description:
Individual and collective financial ownership of Canadian-controlled and provincially
incorporated companies can be no more than 10 per cent of shares.

1558

Reservation IIIA-PT-99
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Senior management and boards of directors

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Credit Union Act, 1985, S.S. 1984-85-86, c. C-45.1

Description:
A director of a credit union in Saskatchewan must be a Canadian citizen.

1559

Reservation IIIA-PT-100
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Credit Union Act, 1985, S.S. 1984-85-86, c. C-45.1

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in Saskatchewan.

1560

Reservation IIIA-PT-101
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Community bonds corporations

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Community Bonds Act, S.S. 1990-91, c. C-16.1

Description:
A director of a Community Bonds corporation must be resident of Saskatchewan.

1561

Reservation IIIA-PT-102
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Securities Act, 1988, S.S. 1988-89, c. S-42.2
The Securities Commission (Adoption of National Instruments)
Regulations, R.R.S. c. S-42.2 Reg. 3

Description:
There is a requirement to register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident of or registered in the province in which the trade is affected.

1562

Reservation IIIA-PT-103
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Advisory and auxiliary financial services

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Securities Act, 1988, S.S. 1988-89, c. S-42.2

Description:
Where an advisor provides advice in Saskatchewan, such services must be supplied through a
commercial presence, and the advisor must be registered in Saskatchewan as an advisor.

1563

Reservation IIIA-PT-104
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Securities dealers and brokers

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Securities Act, 1988, S.S. 1988-89, c. S-42.2

Description:
Securities dealers and brokers must be formed or continued under federal, provincial or
territorial laws.

1564

Reservation IIIA-PT-105
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Securities Act, 1988, S.S. 1988-89, c. S-42.2
The Securities Commission (Adoption of National Instruments)
Regulations, R.R.S. c. S-42.2 Reg. 3

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if the sub-custodian has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100
million.

1565

Reservations applicable in Yukon
Reservation IIIA-PT-106
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance and reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 119

Description:
Insurance services in the Yukon can be provided only through:
(a)

a corporation incorporated under Yukon laws;

(b)

an extra-provincial insurance corporation, that is an insurer incorporated by, or
under the laws of another Canadian jurisdiction;

(c)

a federally-authorised branch of a foreign corporation;

(d)

an association formed on the plan known as Lloyds;

(e)

reciprocal insurance exchanges; or

(f)

fraternal societies.

1566

Reservation IIIA-PT-107
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Direct insurance contracts relating to maritime shipping,
commercial aviation, space launching, freight (including
satellites) and goods in international transit

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 119

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in the Yukon.

1567

Reservation IIIA-PT-108
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 119

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in the Yukon.

1568

Reservation IIIA-PT-109
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Intermediation of insurance contracts related to maritime
transport and commercial aviation and space launching and
freight (including satellites), and to reinsurance and retrocession

Type of Reservation:

Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 119

Description:
Services must be supplied through a commercial presence in the Yukon.

1569

Reservation IIIA-PT-110
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trust and loan companies

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
To operate as a trust and loan company under the Yukon regime an entity must be a body
corporate to which the Business Corporations Act applies.

1570

Reservation IIIA-PT-111
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Credit unions, caisses populaires and associations or groups
thereof

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
A credit union must incorporate in the Yukon.

1571

Reservation IIIA-PT-112
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading in securities and commodity futures – persons

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
An individual or firm must register in order to trade through dealers and brokers that are not
resident or registered in the Yukon.

1572

Reservation IIIA-PT-113
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Securities dealers and brokers

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Securities Act, S.Y. 2007, c. 16
Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
Securities dealers and brokers in the Yukon must be formed or continued under federal,
provincial or territorial laws.

1573

Reservation IIIA-PT-114
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Trading for own account and for account of customers: custodial
services; trading in securities and commodity futures – persons;
securities dealers and brokers; trading in securities and
commodity futures; advisory and auxiliary financial services;
dealers, brokers, advisors

Type of Reservation:

National treatment

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
An individual applicant for registration is required to have been a resident of Canada for a
period of at least one year prior to the application and a resident of the province in which he or
she wishes to operate at the date of application.

1574

Reservation IIIA-PT-115
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has share-holders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1575

SECTION B
Reservations applicable in Canada
(applicable in all Provinces and Territories)
Reservation IIIB-C-1

Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

All

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Description:
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure stipulating that federally-regulated
financial institutions having equity in excess of CAD$1 billion are required, within three years
of having reached this threshold, to have 35 per cent of their voting shares widely-held and
listed and posted for trading on a stock exchange in Canada.

1576

Reservation IIIB-C-2
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

All

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

National

Description:
1. Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure requiring Ministerial approval of an
acquisition by a person (Canadian or foreign) of shares of a federally-regulated financial
institution constituted under the Bank Act, S.C. 1991, c. 46, the Insurance Companies Act, S.C.
1991, c. 47, or the Trust and Loan Companies Act, S.C. 1991, c. 45, if, following the
acquisition, the person would have ownership of more than 10 per cent of any class of its shares.
2. Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure such that no person (Canadian or
foreign) may own more than 20 per cent of any class of voting shares, or 30 per cent of any
class of non-voting shares, of:
(a)

a bank or bank holding company with CAD$12 billion or more in equity; or

(b)
a federally-regulated financial institution constituted under the Bank Act, the Insurance
Companies Act or the Trust and Loan Companies Act that, at the time of entry into force of the
Agreement, is widely held86 because it is so required, including by reason of its designation as a
domestic systemically important financial institution.
3. Notwithstanding sub-paragraph 2(a), a European Union financial institution that is regulated
as a bank in the European Union or any other European Union financial institution that is
regulated in the European Union and is widely held, may continue to control a bank or a bank
holding company if it controlled the bank or bank holding company on the day the bank’s or
bank holding company’s equity reached the applicable threshold for the widely held
requirement and it has controlled the bank since that day.

86

For the purposes of subparagraph 2(b), a financial institution is deemed to be widely-held at the date of
entry into force of this Agreement if: (1) it was required to be widely-held on 17 July 2014; or (2) after
17 July 2014 but before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, a determination is made that the
financial institution is required to become widely-held and it did not make reasonable efforts to do so by
the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

1577

Reservation IIIB-C-3
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

National Treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Description:
1. Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure requiring that a foreign bank
establish a subsidiary in order to accept or maintain retail deposits of less than CAD$150,000
unless the sum of all deposits that are maintained by a foreign bank and that fall below
CAD$150,000 amount to less than one per cent of total deposits or the deposits are taken from a
sophisticated investor (for example, Canadian federal or provincial governments, foreign
governments, international development banks to which Canada is a member, financial
institutions, certain pension and mutual funds and large businesses).
2. Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure prohibiting full service bank
branches and lending bank branches from becoming member institutions of the Canada Deposit
Insurance Corporation.

1578

Reservation IIIB-C-4
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

National Treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

National

Description:
Canada reserves the right to adopt or maintain a measure prohibiting lending branches of
foreign banks from being members of the Canadian Payments Association.

1579

Reservations applicable in Alberta
Reservation IIIB-PT-1
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Alberta

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. S-4

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1580

Reservations applicable in British Columbia
Reservation IIIB-PT-2
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 418

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if the sub-custodian has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100
million.

1581

Reservation IIIB-PT-3
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – British Columbia

Measures:

Insurance Corporation Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 228
Exclusion Regulation, B.C. Reg. 153/73

Description:
Motor vehicle insurance in British Columbia is provided by public monopoly.

1582

Reservations applicable in Manitoba
Reservation IIIB-PT-4
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services
Motor vehicle insurance

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

Manitoba Public Insurance Corporation Act, C.C.S.M. c. P215

Description:
Motor vehicle insurance in Manitoba is provided by public monopoly.

1583

Reservation IIIB-PT-5
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Manitoba

Measures:

The Securities Act, C.C.S.M. c. S50

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1584

Reservations applicable in New Brunswick
Reservation IIIB-PT-6
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – New Brunswick

Measures:

Securities Act, S.N.B. 2004, c. S-5.5

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1585

Reservations applicable in Newfoundland and Labrador
Reservation IIIB-PT-7
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Newfoundland and Labrador

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.L. 1990, c. S-13

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1586

Reservations applicable in the Northwest Territories
Reservation IIIB-PT-8
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Northwest Territories

Measures:

Securities Act, S.N.W.T. 2008, c. 10

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1587

Reservations applicable in Nova Scotia
Reservation IIIB-PT-9
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Nova Scotia

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 418

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1588

Reservations applicable in Nunavut
Reservation IIIB-PT-10
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Nunavut

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.N.W.T. (Nu.) 1988, c. S-5

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1589

Reservations applicable in Ontario
Reservation IIIB-PT-11
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services – services auxiliary to
insurance and pension funding

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Most-favoured-nation treatment
Market access
Cross-border supply of financial services

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, ss. 54(1), 386(1), 386(2), 403
Agents, O. Reg. 347/04

Description:
Preferential access to the Ontario insurance services market is provided to non-resident
individual insurance agents of the United States of America (to all states in the United States of
America based on reciprocity).

1590

Reservation IIIB-PT-12
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Ontario

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.5, s. 143
National Instrument 31-103 Registration, Exemptions and
Ongoing Registrant
National Instrument 81-102 Mutual Funds

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1591

Reservations applicable in Prince Edward Island
Reservation IIIB-PT-13
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Prince Edward Island

Measures:

Securities Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c. S-3.1

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1592

Reservations applicable in Québec
Reservation IIIB-PT-14
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

An Act respecting the Société de l’assurance automobile du
Québec, C.Q.L.R., c. S-11.011

Description:
Automobile insurance, with respect to personal injury and death, is provided by public
monopoly in Québec.

1593

Reservation IIIB-PT-15
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:
Description:
The acceptance of deposits of public and para-public institutions and the management of
pension funds of public and para-public institutions are provided by a public monopoly in
Québec.

1594

Reservation IIIB-PT-16
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Québec

Measures:

Securities Act, C.Q.L.R., c. V-1.1
Regulation 81-102 respecting Mutual Funds, C.Q.L.R., c. V-1.1,
r. 39

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1595

Reservations applicable in Saskatchewan
Reservation IIIB-PT-17
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Securities Act, 1988, S.S. 1988-89, c. S-42.2
The Securities Commission (Adoption of National Instruments)
Regulations, R.R.S. c. S-42.2 Reg. 3

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if the sub-custodian has shareholders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100
million.

1596

Reservation IIIB-PT-18
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Insurance and insurance related services

Type of Reservation:

National treatment
Market access

Level of Government:

Provincial – Saskatchewan

Measures:

The Traffic Safety Act, S.S. 2004, c. T-18.1
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, R.S.S. 1978, c. A-35

Description:
Motor vehicle insurance is provided by public monopoly in Saskatchewan.

1597

Reservations applicable in Yukon
Reservation IIIB-PT-19
Sector:

Financial services

Sub-Sector:

Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
Custodial services

Type of Reservation:

Market access

Level of Government:

Territorial – Yukon

Measures:

Business Corporations Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 20

Description:
Mutual funds which offer securities in Canada must use a resident custodian. A non-resident
sub-custodian may be used if it has share-holders’ equity of at least CAD$ 100 million.

1598

