Where We Stand: The
Integration of Climate
Change Education in
Canadian Schools
A WORKING PAPER BY BCCIC CLIMATE CHANGE

November 2021
By Kylie Schatz
Working Paper

From the level of international treaties all the way down to the
realities in the classroom, there remains a serious gap between the
understood importance of education in climate policy and the
actual attention to climate change in our education system. This
paper will look at why climate change education is important,
highlight key aspects to consider regarding how climate change is
taught, provide a summary of how each province is doing, and end
on key recommendations for the incorporation of climate change
education in Canadian schools.

Where We Stand: The Integration of Climate Change Education in
Canadian Schools
November 2021

AUTHOR
Kylie Schatz, Special Projects Officer (Volunteer), BC Council for International
Cooperation Climate Change Branch
This working paper was produced with editing support from Sinem Culhaoglu, Nicolas
Gaulin, and Dr. Zosa De Sas Kropiwnicki-Gruber and designed by Kylie Schatz.
RECOMMENDED CITATION
Schatz, K., (2021): Where We Stand: The Integration of Climate Change Education in
Canadian Schools; British Columbia Council for International Cooperation, Vancouver,
BC, Canada. P15.

The British Columbia Council for International Cooperation (BCCIC) is a network of
civil society organizations and individuals moving toward a better world based in British
Columbia, Canada.
For more information on BCCIC or this publication, go to: bccic.ca/ or contact us:
Unit 322 – 268 Keefer St., Vancouver, BC, V6A 1X5
Phone: 604.899.4475
All intellectual content including omissions and errors remains the responsibility and
property of the BC Council for International Cooperation.

2

Table of Contents
Executive Summary

4

Section 1: The Critical Connection: Climate and Education Policy

5

Section 2: The Devil in the Details: Key Aspects of Incorporating
Climate Change into the Curriculum

7

Section 3: Where the Provinces Stand

12

Section 4: Recommendations

15

Endnotes

17

Bibliography

18

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

3

WHERE WE STAND

Executive Summary

Despite calls to enhance the climate change
education offered to students across Canada,
the curriculum in many jurisdictions continues
to fall short. While the state of the curricula
varies from province to province (see Section
3), there are clear trends that curricula across
the country is lacking on the subjects of the
scientific consensus on climate change, impacts
and future risks due to climate change, and
adaptation and mitigation options.¹
In addition to the mere presence of climate
change content, it is critical that this curricula
moves beyond the mindset of individual action
to address the need for systemic change. This
can be addressed by learning about climate
change in both science and humanity classes,
so fact and debate can be easily delineated,
discussing the ties between inequality and the
impacts of climate change, drawing on
Indigenous knowledge and stewardship
practices in a school’s area, and utilizing
context specific data and information to tie
student’s learning to their own communities.
While there are some inspiring examples of
teachers incorporating experiential learning,
Indigenous community perspectives, and

student empowerment into their teaching, the
majority of teachers continue to feel that they
lack the support and resources to properly
address climate change in their classes.² While
resources offered by non-profits fill this gap in
some parts of the country, teachers should not
have to rely on such materials. There is a clear
need for teachers to be offered more
professional development opportunities
related to climate change and resources from
the provinces to stay up to date with
technological advances and make the best use
of local data and information.
Climate change education is a crucial piece of
climate action. We know that climate change
will come to affect all aspects of our lives and
our future decision making. This embedded
nature must be reflected in the education we
offer our students, tying together everything
from ecosystems to development, history, and
inequality. This education not only fosters an
informed citizenry, but empowers students to
innovate and push for change in their
communities.

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

4

SECTION 1

The Critical Connection: Climate and Education Policy

Both within Canada and internationally,
foundational climate policy documents
recognize that education on climate change is a
key part of tackling our global climate crisis and
pursuing Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
13, climate action. As a signatory to the Paris
Agreement, Canada has made a commitment
on the international stage to enhance climate
change education.³ Article 12 of the Paris
Agreement⁴ specifically stipulates that, “parties
shall cooperate in taking measures, as
appropriate, to enhance climate change
education.”⁵ The few commitments to
environmental citizenship existing in Canadian
federal government documents, such as those
in the Common Framework of Science Learning
Outcomes K-12 (1997), which stipulates that
“students will be encouraged to develop
attitudes that support the responsible
acquisition and application of scientific and
technological knowledge to the mutual benefit
of self, society, and the environment,” have not
translated into intentional changes in the
curriculum.⁶ Instead, research has shown that
the incorporation of climate change education
continues to be added into the curriculum only
as an afterthought.⁷

This trend is even starker at the provincial/
territorial level, where curriculum is actually
developed. Whereas a majority of jurisdictions
include education as a part of their plans to
address climate change, only six out of the
thirteen mention climate change, in terms of
curriculum reform or other such action, in their
education policies.⁸ From the level of federal
policy making and provincial curriculum
development, all the way down to the realities
in the classroom, research has shown that
there remains a serious gap between the
understood importance of education in climate
policy and actual attention to climate change in
our education system.⁹ This paper will look at
why climate change education is important,
highlight key aspects to consider regarding
how climate change is taught, provide a
summary of how each province is doing, and
end on key recommendations for the
incorporation of climate change education in
Canadian schools. These findings were
generated through policy analysis and a
secondary literature review, and seek to give a
general overview of the state of climate change
curriculum in Canadian schools and not a fully
comprehensive review of the inclusion of

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

5

by John Lee via Unsplash
climate change related curriculum across the
provinces. While the analysis for some
provinces, particularly for those with recently
amended curriculum, involved the review of
current curriculum documents, the review of
other provinces relied on existing findings and
summations of the curricula.
First, why? Addressing climate change involves
pursuing actions with short-term costs for longterm gain. Thus, ensuring continued political
will for ambitious policy is going to require a
citizenry that is informed and willing to enact
behavioural changes.¹⁰ National surveys have
shown that while Canadians generally accept
that climate change exists, the understanding
that it is caused by humans is still not as widely
accepted.¹¹ There also remains a gap between
Canadians’ high level of concern and their
actual level of knowledge in regards to climate
change.¹² Comprehensive education on climate
change can help Canadians move from being
concerned to empowered. Education is a key
aspect of handling the climate crisis, not only
because of the need for sociocultural and

micro-behavioural shifts, but also to create an
engaged and empowered citizenry, ready to
navigate the choices and challenges ahead.
Pressure for curriculum change has also come
from students across Canada. In workshops
with students in Alberta, the Alberta Council for
Environmental Education found that there was
a gap between the education that these
students received and the information that
they wanted on energy and the environment,
making them feel that they lacked the
information and power to act.¹³ A group of
secondary students in BC have turned this
discontent into activism, creating the studentled movement “Climate Education Reform
BC.”¹⁴ Their campaign advocates for curriculum
revision, the provision of more professional
development opportunities for teachers, and
the creation of a youth committee to ensure
accountability and provide feedback.¹⁵ Thus,
youth, who have shown themselves to be
particularly forceful in the climate action
movement, have added their voices to the call
for more holistic climate change education.

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

6

SECTION 2

The Devil in the Details: Key Aspects of
Incorporating Climate Change into the
Curriculum
A. Curriculum Development
There is strong reason to believe that climate
change education is still highly dependent on
the capacities and inclinations of individual
teachers.¹⁶ This is largely due to a lack of
specificity in the curriculum when it comes to
climate change and a lack of resources and
professional development opportunities for
teachers. Teachers have noted that despite
their desire to provide climate change
education, they face a lack of time to
incorporate extra material into an already
demanding curriculum.¹⁷ Since this system puts
the onus largely on teachers, those in school
systems that are already underfunded or
lacking in resources will face additional
challenges trying to incorporate climate change
education into their classes. At the provincial
level, addressing this gap requires
collaboration between the ministries of
education and those of environment and
climate change to embed climate change more
explicitly into the curriculum.¹⁸ Given the
constant advancements in science related to
climate change, this collaboration needs to be
ongoing to allow for frequent revisions that
keep the curriculum up to date.

B. What Frameworks do Teachers Use
When developing curriculum, the framing of
climate change, especially when discussing
solutions, is critical. While there are different
terms to refer to different types of

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

7

environmentalism and policy discourses, the
key distinction to note is between a discourse
that is individual and market-based versus one
that sees climate change as requiring systemic
change. For example, “market
environmentalism” and “smart growth
reformers” tend to prioritize market-based
solutions and the importance of individual
voluntary action over collective action and
government intervention.²⁰ This view
emphasizes that social change is just the
aggregate of individual behaviour and that
focusing on individual changes is sufficient. In
contrast, a “ecological modernist” view focuses
on social innovation and government
investment in technology and other state
intervention while “ecological activists” believe

in the need for grassroots movements and
larger systematic change.²² This view is more
likely to also take on a social justice lens that
examines climate change as an issue of power
and identity, as well as public health.²³ Through
such a framework, teachers can address the
values of justice and equity in climate action by
examining the ways in which climate change
furthers social disparities and often has the
greatest impact on marginalized groups.
A curriculum that prioritizes the role of
individual action and the power of the markets
underestimates the depth of change required
to reduce emissions at the rates that are
required.²⁴ Discourses that evade addressing
the need for government-coordinated system
change fall short of providing a clear picture of
the challenges posed by the climate crisis.
C. Curriculum in both sciences and
humanity-based classes
We need to conceptualize climate change
curricula as two-sided. The first side is the
science of the issue, understanding how
climate change works, that it is human caused,
that there is scientific consensus on these facts,
and the risks that we, as humankind, face as it
progresses. The second side is ‘how we address
this issue,’ which is more appropriate for
humanity-based discussions on global
citizenship, social justice, and government
policy. It is critical that this second side is seen
as separate from the first to not conflate what
is debatable (policy solutions) and what is not
(scientific consensus). Introducing the
interactions between social justice and climate
action is particularly crucial given the way
climate change will further exacerbate our
societies numerous inequities. Furthermore, it

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

8

by Priscilla du Preez via Unsplash

is important that discussions of climate change
move beyond the science to look at and
discuss our role in working towards a solution.
A blending of these two sides has led some
teachers, in an effort to show a balanced and
unbiased picture, to mistakenly convey that the
science on climate change is up for debate. In
curriculum development, there tends to be a
focus on balance instead of evidence when it
comes to hot-topics to give room for students
to decide the merits of each argument for
themselves. However, in a topic that holds wide
scientific consensus, this tactic is
counterproductive since it creates the illusion
of disagreement on the science where very
little exists.²⁵ This can be particularly confusing
for students if various viewpoints are given
equal weight and allowed to veil scientific facts,
especially when these topics are addressed in a
science class.²⁶ For example, in Manitoba,
Newfoundland, and Prince Edward Island,
curriculum documents convey disagreement
within the scientific community over climate
change, more so than exists in reality, and
encourage debate on the subject.²⁷
Furthermore, a national study found that a
third of teachers were open to students
debating the causes of climate change instead
of presenting it as human-caused.²⁸ Such
obfuscation makes evident the importance of

differentiating between scientific arguments
and political ones.²⁹
This distinction between the science and
politics of climate change could be achieved by
either splitting curriculum between science and
humanity-based courses or tackling the subject
in a dedicated course or unit on climate
change, that starts with the science and then
moves to talking about possible solutions and
political arguments.³⁰ Some schools also opt to
make climate change a key theme throughout
the year. Such an integrated approach, by
focusing on the ways in which climate change
touches all aspects of our lives and the
interconnections between the social and
environmental, could better allow schools to
incorporate context-based content that draws
on Indigenous knowledge, particularly in the
realms of environmental stewardship,
cooperation, and problem solving.³¹ The
decision between these three approaches
should be made based on the competencies of
teachers and the ability of the province to
provide proper training. While there are clear
benefits to having a dedicated course on
climate change, more integrated approaches
have their own benefits if teachers are
provided with the proper interdisciplinary
training and resources.³²

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

9

D. Providing Resources to Teachers
Budget cuts and limitations in the materials
provided to teachers have led many to rely on
resource packages and other informational
guides from various non-profits. In British
Columbia, the Canadian Centre for Policy
Alternatives’ Climate Justice Project has created
“Climate Justice in BC: Lessons for
Transformation,” a resource package for
teachers with classroom-ready materials to
engage students in discussions on the
intersection between climate action and social
justice.³³ Based on BC’s local communities, the
package ties together the issues of climate
change and rising inequality as it focuses on
allowing students an opportunity to re-imagine
the systems around them.³⁴ While it is tied to
prescribed learning outcomes in the BC
Curriculum, it provides teachers with the
background to tie climate justice to BC’s
communities, ecology, history, and economy.³⁵
Similarly, the Yukon First Nations Curriculum
Working Group created a Cross-Curricular Unit
on Climate Change for Grade 8 and 9 that tied
climate change discussions to Yukon First
Nations ways of knowing and doing to better
understand the implications of climate change
and the action required to address it.³⁶ Of
particular interest, the unit provides multiple
ideas for local inquiry based experiential
activities, draws on traditional knowledge to
investigate local changes, and urges educators
to collaborate with their local First Nations
communities.³⁷ Such efforts also highlight the
importance of curriculum development
prioritizing local context based material that
connects students to the land and its history.
Other organizations include Learning for a
Sustainable Future, which publishes resource
books for teachers,³⁸ and Ontario EcoSchools,
which runs a certification program for schools

and provides both professional development
opportunities and education resources to
teachers.³⁹
While some of these organizations do an
admirable job of filling a gap and supporting
teachers with contextualized resources for
their province, such resources must be
examined with a critical eye. In Saskatchewan
there are six third-party organizations that
have developed curriculum resources,
provided professional development
opportunities, and delivered programming
directly in schools, whose background should
make us question their involvement.⁴⁰ These
groups are largely funded by the oil industry
and their outsized influence on climate change
education in the province has led to the
predominant promotion of market-based
environmentalism and the role of individual
action.⁴¹ Accusations of anti-energy bias in
school curriculum have allowed these
organizations to swoop in with ‘bias-balanced’
materials, which give as much weight to
industry perspectives as evidence-based
environmental concerns. As discussed earlier,
this is problematic because it blends the
politics and the science of the issue. Since
teachers are eager to use these resources,
especially the professional development
opportunities and funding for excursions, since
they lack funding to pursue such opportunities
otherwise, it has made teachers feel pressured
to always include an industry perspective in
their discussions on climate change. While
Saskatchewan has one of the most robust and
comprehensive climate change curricula in the
country, as will be discussed more in the next
section,⁴² reliance on ‘bias-balanced’ materials
reveals that it is not just the presence of
curriculum that matters, but also how it is
taught.

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

10

E. Beyond the Basics
As alluded to throughout the previous four
sections, it is important to address through
climate change education the interconnections
between the environment and our society. It is
impossible to fully understand the causes and
impacts of climate change unless you account
for social and ecological contexts such as the
wealth gap, gender inequalities, socioeconomic conditions, and histories of
colonialism.⁴³ Climate touches all aspects of
our lives, including health, power, wealth,
identity, and security, and touches upon the
foundation of our sense of justice and equity.⁴⁴
Seeing climate change as separate from our
culture and societal structure is ignoring a
fundamental aspect of this crisis. Instead, we
must help students to see how human ecology
is both shaped by and embedded in global
ecosystems.⁴⁵ When examining issues such as
the causes and impacts of climate change, it is
crucial that students are challenged to examine
who is most affected by climate change and
how these groups are often marginalized and
hold the least responsibility for causing climate
change. For example, numerous studies have
shown that, due to a wide host of reasons,
women and girls face a disproportionately
negative impact due to climate change.⁴⁶
Examples such as heat waves, now a lived
experience for many, can similarly illustrate the
higher impact of climate change on the elderly,
particularly those lacking in resources. Such
examples show that it is essential that students
are taught how to consider climate change
from a gender-sensitive intersectional lens.⁴⁷

knowledge and practices have already been
lauded as crucial in our efforts at mitigation
and adaptation in Canada. The Yukon First
Nations Curriculum Working Group’s CrossCurricular Unit aptly summarizes how this
knowledge is also crucial for climate change
education: “Students will inquire into the
necessary skills for adapting to and reducing
climate changes, taking lessons from Yukon
First Nations who have faced vast
environmental and social changes with the
strength, resiliency, and persistence needed for
survival.”⁴⁸ By connecting with Indigenous
leaders and elders through learning about
environmental stewardship, schools create an
opportunity for students to not only improve
their understanding of climate change, but also
gain an appreciation for the history of the land
they live on and the histories, both pre- and
post-colonialism, that have shaped it.

⁴⁹

While this education can tie into global and
national patterns, it needs to also connect to
communities and local contexts. Indigenous

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

11

SECTION 3

Where the Provinces Stand

On a province-by-province level, we will now
look at how each jurisdiction is incorporating
climate action education into their curricula.
Since education policies, most notably
curriculum development, occur on the
provincial level, it is important to see how each
jurisdiction is enacting improvements to their
climate change education. The territories and
the smaller jurisdictions largely base their
curricula on the other provinces and thus will
not be addressed separately. However, as seen
by the example of the Yukon First Nations
Curriculum Working Group’s Cross-Curricular
Unit on Climate Change, this curriculum can
and should be supplemented with locally
created content, allowing education to be
better tied to local contexts, communities, and
history.⁵⁰
First, a look at climate education statistics in
Canada. In 2020, 35-59% of teachers reported
teaching climate change in the classroom, most
for about one to ten hours per year or
semester.⁵¹ Only 32-33% said they felt like they
had the knowledge or skills to teach climate
change, noting barriers such as lack of time,
resources, and professional knowledge.⁵²

Overall, a lack of clear policy left decisions
regarding climate change up to individual
teachers. A paper by Wynes and Nicholas
(2019) evaluated curriculum by dividing the
possible focuses of climate change curriculum
into six core topics:⁵³
1. How the climate works (introducing the
science of the earth’s climate)
2. It’s warming (recognizing that climate is
overall getting warmer)
3. It’s us (explaining that humans are causing
climate change)
4. Experts agree (accepting that there is
scientific consensus on climate science)
5. It’s bad (understanding the damage climate
change could cause)
6. We can fix it (examining policy options to
address climate change)
They then evaluated how well each province
covered each of these topics. Overall, they
found that curricula across Canada failed to
convey the impacts of and possible solutions

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

12

for climate change, and only one province
emphasized the scientific consensus in their
curriculum.⁵⁴ The lack of attention to the
impacts of climate change suggests that subtopics in this area, such as the unequal effects
of these changes, particularly on marginalized
communities, are not given due attention.
Ontario
Ontario has included some substantive content
on climate change in their education policies,
with a generally ecological modernist approach
that emphasizes technology and innovation but
also includes aspects of climate justice.⁵³ While
climate change is most explicitly included in the
Grade 10 Applied Science course, it is
connected to subject-specific learning
outcomes in both science and humanity based
courses.⁵⁶ Of the six core topics delineated by
Wynes and Nicholas’ study, they addressed five
of the six topics, all but expert agreement.⁵⁷
Quebec
Quebec also touches upon the same five core
topics as Ontario in its curriculum (all but
expert agreement), but does not have as
strong of an emphasis on impacts and
solutions.⁵⁸ This is an improvement from 2017,
when its curriculum had little concrete
connection to climate change education.⁵⁹ The
curriculum uses a mix of ecological modernist
and smart growth approaches, focusing on
renewable energy sources, social innovations,
and emissions trading.⁶⁰ However, the province
has been critiqued for not providing teachers
with enough resources or training in the field
of climate change.⁶¹

Manitoba
Of the six core topics, Manitoba only addresses
three in its curriculum, lacking reference to the
fact that the climate is warming, any solutions,
and the existence of expert consensus.⁶² Their
approach is also a mix of ecomodernist and
smart growth. Despite their current
shortcomings, the province has one of the
more ambitious plans in the nation to
incorporate more climate change education
into their curriculum.⁶³
British Columbia
British Columbia (BC) covers the same three
core topics as Manitoba, how the climate
works, human-induced cause, and the impact it
will have. BC’s climate action plan has made
engaging with climate a priority for K-12
education.⁶⁴ While climate change is
incorporated into curriculum throughout the
grades, including particular high school elective
courses, the basics of the science of climate
change and the human response is divided
neatly between the Grade 7 Science and Grade
7 Social Studies courses.⁶⁵
Case Study: BC’s Climate Curriculum⁶⁶
One of the key units for Science 7 in BC is
“earth and its climate have changed over time.”
Teachers are expected to cover the “evidence
of climate change” and “the recent impact of
humans.” As stated above, these inclusions
clearly cover the topics of how the climate
works and that humans are causing climate
change. The Social Studies curriculum for
Grade 7 then looks at how humans have
adapted to challenges in the past regarding the
climate, but doesn’t require teachers to discuss
responses to the current climate crisis.

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

13

Climate change is also discussed in the Grade
11 elective courses Science for Citizens 11 and
Earth Sciences 11. While Earth Sciences 11
delves into climate science and the evidence
and effects of climate change, Science for
Citizens 11 just touches on human’s impact on
the climate and the potential effects of climate
change.

of climate justice can be most effectively
addressed. Such discussion in humanity based
courses would better allow for discussion on
connections between the changing climate,
local history and context, rising inequality, and
existing power structures.⁷¹

A study has shown that the policy discourse in
BC’s curriculum includes aspects of both smart
growth and ecological modernization
approaches, meaning that it combines marketbased solutions, individual action, and the role
of government intervention.⁶⁷ Yet the
curriculum also lacks room to focus on policy
responses to climate change, which is the core
of climate action.⁶⁸ The curriculum also fails to
focus on green activism and ideas of systemic
change that could empower youth to push for
deep societal change through climate action.
While providing students with foundational
knowledge on climate change is important, the
curriculum doesn’t help students make the
jump from knowledge to action.

While Alberta’s curriculum is not particularly
strong in any of the six areas, it does touch on
all besides the scientific consensus and
solutions. In a particularly telling remark,
Alberta Education Minister Adriana LaGrange
endorsed a report in 2020 that recommended
that students learn all views about climate
change in conjunction with the value of the
province’s oil and gas sector.⁷² A local nonprofit, Alberta Council for Environmental
Education, found through workshops with
students that most students were unsatisfied
with the degree to which climate curriculum
was incorporated into their education and felt
that they lacked the knowledge to act.⁷³

Alberta

Saskatchewan

⁷⁴

As noted earlier, Saskatchewan has one of the
most comprehensive climate change curricula
in place, addressing every core topic fairly
well.⁶⁹ This has surprised some researchers
given that Saskatchewan has the highest per
capita greenhouse gas emissions in Canada
due to its fossil fuel extraction, showing that
there is not necessarily a link between political
conservatism and the presence of climate
change curriculum.⁷⁰ While climate change is
covered heavily in the required course Science
10, it has not been significantly incorporated
into any social science curriculum where ideas

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

14

SECTION 4

Recommendations

Canada’s provinces have taken some steps in
progressing climate change education. Yet
there remains a lack of coordination between
climate and education policy makers, as well as
insufficient professional development
opportunities for teachers.⁷⁵ There is also a
notable absence of curriculum content related
to adaptation, disaster risk reduction, and
climate justice which is compounded by the
lack of mechanisms to integrate leading-edge
science.⁷⁶ Additionally, curricula fail to
emphasize the strength of the scientific
consensus, allowing too much debate on issues
that are settled in the scientific community.⁷⁷
With these realities in mind, we present the
following recommendations:
•

•

Teachers need to be provided with the
professional development opportunities to
improve their knowledge and strategies
related to teaching climate change
Teachers need to be provided with contextspecific resources to help them teach
climate change, including relevant local,
national, and international data

•

Curricula should emphasize that there is
scientific consensus on the mechanisms
and role of humans in causing climate
change

•

More curriculum content is needed
regarding the various approaches to
climate change policy and possible avenues
for addressing climate change, with
additional emphasis on structuralist and
climate justice approaches (which should
incorporate feminist, decolonial, and social
justice lenses), in order to empower
students and provide needed context on
the interconnections between socioeconomic structures, colonial legacies,
patriarchy, local histories, and climate
change

•

Scientific facts and political debates need to
be clearly separated in the curriculum so
that students understand what is fact and
what is a political view, ideally through
coordinated placement in both the science
and humanity curricula

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

15

•

Alternatively, if there is a single class or unit
that focuses on climate change, it should be
organized to begin with the science and
then move to political debates

•

The ministries of education and ministries
of the environment in each province should
pursue ongoing collaboration to ensure
that cutting-edge science and ideas are
incorporated into curricula and that the
commitments made towards climate
change education in climate policy are
realized

•

Curricula and other resources for teachers
should clearly delineate fact from areas that
are up for debate, particularly so teachers
don’t feel pressured into using ‘biasbalanced’ materials

•

Curriculum changes should be created with
youth empowerment in mind, giving
students an opportunity to innovate and
share their ideas, and paired with avenues
for students to act as climate change
leaders in their communities through afterschool options

•

Curricula should be developed in
collaboration with Indigenous communities
in a way that emphasizes the value of
Indigenous knowledge and practices in the
realms of environmental stewardship and
ongoing innovation for climate action

•

Curricula should include information and
tools, such as the Government of Canada’s
free online Gender-Based Analysis+ course,
that will allow students to analyse the
differential impacts of climate change on
marginalized and underrepresented groups

•

The ministries of education should
establish channels through which teachers
across Canada can discuss best practices,
teaching tools, resources, class activities,
and other useful information for the
teaching of climate change to encourage
strategies that promote critical enquiry
among students and innovative ideas

•

Curriculum development on climate change
should draw on the expertise of climate
leaders from a variety of backgrounds to
ensure a holistic approach

by NeONBRAND via Unsplash

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

16

Endnotes
1. Wynes, Seth, and Kimberly A. Nicholas. “Climate Science
Curricula in Canadian Secondary Schools Focus on
Human Warming, Not Scientific Consensus, Impacts or
Solutions.” PLOS ONE 14, no. 7 (July 18, 2019).
2. Field, Dr Ellen, Pamela Schwartzberg, Dr Paul Berger,
and Samantha Gawron. “Climate Change Education in the
Canadian Classroom.” EdCan Network, February 26, 2020.
3. Field, Schwartzberg, Berger and Gawron, “Climate
Change Education in the Canadian Classroom.”
4. The Paris Agreement is to date the most
comprehensive legally-binding international treaty on
climate change. It was adopted by 196 Parties at COP 21
in Paris in 2015.
5. “Paris Agreement.” Conclusion date: December 12,
2015.
6. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
7. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
8. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview,” 70.
9. Ibid.
10. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
11. Goodchild, H., Padolsky, J., & Cheng, T. (2017). Climate
change learning & action in Ontario’s certified schools.
Toronto: EcoSchools Canada.
12. Field, Schwartzberg, Berger and Gawron, “Climate
Change Education in the Canadian Classroom.”
13. The Canadian Press. "Alberta Students Want More
Education on Climate Change, Report Suggests." CBC,
November 15, 2020.
14. "Reform To Transform." Climate Education Reform BC.
https://www.climateeducationreformbc.ca/events-1.
15. Ibid.
16. Goodchild, Padolsky, and Cheng, Climate change
learning & action in Ontario’s certified schools.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid.
19. Alsop, Steve, David Greenwood, Philip Vaughter, and
Sabrina Scott. “Climate Change Education: Acting for
Change.” Report. York University, Lakehead University.
December 2015.
20. Mildenberger, Matto, Peter Howe, Erick Lachapelle,
Leah Stokes, Jennifer Marlon, and Timothy Gravelle.
“Crude Lessons.” Edited by Henrik Österblom. PLOS ONE
11, no. 8 (August 3, 2016).
21. Alsop, Greenwood, Vaughter, “Climate Change
Education: Acting for Change.”
22. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National

Overview,” 74.
23. Alsop, Greenwood, Vaughter, “Climate Change
Education: Acting for Change.”
24. Mildenberger, Howe, LAchapelle, Stokes, Marlon, and
Gravelle, “Crude Lessons.”
25. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
26. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview,” 78.
27. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
28. Field, Schwartzberg, Berger and Gawron, “Climate
Change Education in the Canadian Classroom.”
29. Mildenberger, Howe, LAchapelle, Stokes, Marlon, and
Gravelle, “Crude Lessons.”
30. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools,”and The Canadian Press,
"Alberta Students Want More Education on Climate
Change.”
31. Alsop, Greenwood, Vaughter, “Climate Change
Education: Acting for Change.”
32. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools,”and The Canadian Press,
"Alberta Students Want More Education on Climate
Change.”
33. "About." Climate Justice in BC: Lessons for
Transformation. https://teachclimatejustice.ca/about/.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid.
36. "Learn about Yukon's School Curriculum." Accessed
October 2020.
37. Ibid.
38. Israelson, David. "Climate Change Compels Schools to
Improve Environmental Literacy." The Globe and Mail,
October 14, 2019.
39. Goodchild, Padolsky, and Cheng, Climate change
learning & action in Ontario’s certified schools.
40. Mildenberger, Howe, LAchapelle, Stokes, Marlon, and
Gravelle, “Crude Lessons.”
41. Ibid.
42. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
43. Alsop, Greenwood, Vaughter, “Climate Change
Education: Acting for Change.”
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.
46. Hoogeveen, Dawn, Kerri Klein, Jordan Brubacher, and
Maya K. Gislason. Report. Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change Strategy, Government of British
Columbia. May 2021.
47. The Government of Canada has a free open-access

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

17

course, Gender-based Analysis Plus, that could provide a
foundation for students and teaching in utilizing a
feminist and intersectionalist lens while studying climate
change.
48. "Learn about Yukon's School Curriculum." Accessed
October 2020.
49. Alsop, Greenwood, Vaughter, “Climate Change
Education: Acting for Change.”
50. "Learn about Yukon's School Curriculum." Accessed
October 2020.
51. Field, Schwartzberg, Berger and Gawron, “Climate
Change Education in the Canadian Classroom.”
52. Ibid.
53. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
54. Ibid.
55. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview,” 74.
56. Ibid.
57. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
58. Ibid.
59. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview,” 76.
60. Ibid.
61. Harvey, Blane, Lisa Starr, and Joseph Levitan.
"Opinion: Preparing Our Students for the Climate Future."
January 21, 2020.
62. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”

63. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview.”
64. Ibid., 77.
65. "Curriculum." Building Student Success - B.C. Accessed
November 2020.
66. Ibid.
67. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview.”
68. Ibid.
69. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”
70. Ibid.
71. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview.”
72. The Canadian Press, "Alberta Students Want More
Education on Climate Change.”
73. Ibid.
74. Kwauk, Christina, and Rebecca Winthrop. “Unleashing
the Creativity of Teachers and Students to Combat
Climate Change: An Opportunity for Global Leadership.”
Report. Centre for Universal Education, Brookings
Institute. May 26, 2021.Accessed October 19, 2021
75. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview,” 79.
76. Bieler, Haluza-Delay, Dale and Mckenzie, “A National
Overview,” 80.
77. Wynes and Nicholas, “Climate Science Curricula in
Canadian Secondary Schools.”

Bibliography
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives. "About." Climate Justice in BC: Lessons for Transformation. Accessed
November 2020. https://teachclimatejustice.ca/about/.
Alsop, Steve, David Greenwood, Philip Vaughter, and Sabrina Scott. “Climate Change Education: Acting for
Change.” Report. York University, Lakehead University. December 2015.
Bieler, Andrew, Randolph Haluza-Delay, Ann Dale, and Marcia Mckenzie. “A National Overview of Climate
Change Education Policy: Policy Coherence between Subnational Climate and Education Policies in
Canada (K-12).” Journal of Education for Sustainable Development 11, no. 2 (September 2017): 63–85.
BC Government. "Curriculum." Building Student Success - B.C. Accessed November 2020. https://
curriculum.gov.bc.ca/curriculum.
Climate Education Reform BC. "Reform To Transform." Accessed May 2021. https://
www.climateeducationreformbc.ca/events-1.
Field, Dr Ellen, Pamela Schwartzberg, Dr Paul Berger, and Samantha Gawron. “Climate Change Education in
the Canadian Classroom.” EdCan Network, February 26, 2020. https://www.edcan.ca/articles/climatechange-education-canada/.

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

18

Goodchild, H., Padolsky, J., & Cheng, T. (2017). Climate change learning & action in Ontario’s certified schools.
Toronto: EcoSchools Canada.
Government of Yukon. "Learn about Yukon's School Curriculum." Accessed October 2020. https://yukon.ca/
en/school-curriculum.
Harvey, Blane, Lisa Starr, and Joseph Levitan. "Opinion: Preparing Our Students for the Climate Future."
January 21, 2020. https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/opinion-preparing-our-students-for-the-climatefuture.
Hoogeveen, Dawn, Kerri Klein, Jordan Brubacher, and Maya K. Gislason. Report. Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change Strategy, Government of British Columbia. May 2021.
Israelson, David. "Climate Change Compels Schools to Improve Environmental Literacy -." The Globe and Mail,
October 14, 2019. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/featured-reports/article-climate-crisis-compelsschools-to-improve-environmental-literacy/.
Kwauk, Christina, and Rebecca Winthrop. “Unleashing the Creativity of Teachers and Students to Combat
Climate Change: An Opportunity for Global Leadership.” Report. Centre for Universal Education,
Brookings Institute. May 26, 2021. Accessed October 19, 2021. https://www.brookings.edu/research/
unleashing-the-creativity-of-teachers-and-students-to-combat-climate-change-an-opportunity-for-globalleadership/.
Mildenberger, Matto, Peter Howe, Erick Lachapelle, Leah Stokes, Jennifer Marlon, and Timothy Gravelle.
“Crude Lessons.” Edited by Henrik Österblom. PLOS ONE 11, no. 8 (August 3, 2016): e0159774. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159774.
“Paris Agreement.” Conclusion date: December 12, 2015. United Nations Treaty Series Online, registration no.
I-54113. https://treaties.un.org/pages/AdvanceSearch.aspx?tab=UNTS&clang=_en.
The Canadian Press. "Alberta Students Want More Education on Climate Change, Report Suggests." CBC,
November 15, 2020. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/alberta-climate-change-education1.5803032.
Wynes, Seth, and Kimberly A. Nicholas. “Climate Science Curricula in Canadian Secondary Schools Focus on
Human Warming, Not Scientific Consensus, Impacts or Solutions.” PLOS ONE 14, no. 7 (July 18, 2019):
e0218305. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0218305.

WHERE WE STAND: THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE EDUCATION IN CANADIAN SCHOOLS

19

The British Columbia Council for International
Cooperation (BCCIC) is a coalition of over 140
individuals and civil society organizations that
has engaged in sustainable development and
environmental issues for 30 years.
BCCIC supports its members in becoming more effective
agents of change in their sustainable development efforts by
disseminating knowledge gained through collaborative
projects, building relationships across sectors and networks,
and developing the capacity of sustainable development
practitioners. BCCIC also represents members’ interests and
advances civil society policy recommendations on municipal,
provincial, national, and international issues.
BCCIC receives support from the Government of Canada,
provided through Global Affairs Canada, and membership
dues; project funding from the Kenoli Foundation, the Pacific
Institute for Climate Solutions (PICS) at the University of
Victoria, the RBC Foundation, and Private Donors.

www.bccic.ca

