TREATY OF PEACE WITH GERMANY
(TREATY OF VERSAILLES)
Treaty and protocol signed at Versailles June 28, 1919; protocol signed
by Germany at Paris January 10, 1920
Treaty submitted to the Senate by the President of the United States for
advice and consent to ratification July 10, 1919; 1 Senate resolutions to advise and consent to ratification failed of adoption November 19,1919,2 and March 19, 1920; 3 treaty returned to the President pursuant to resolution of March 19, 1920 4
Protocol of June 28, 1919, submitted to the Senate by the President of
the United States July 31, 1919; 5 considered by the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and laid aside without action on February 10, 1920; 6 returned to the Secretary of State pursuant to
Senate resolution of February 12, 1935 7
Proces-verbal of first deposit of ratifications at Paris dated January 10,
1920
Entered into force January 10,1920,4:15 p.m., as between contracting
parties (the United States was not a party) 8
Revised from time to time by the contracting parties
1919 For. ReI. (Paris Peace Conference,
XIII) 55, 740, 743; Senate document 51,
66th Congress, 1st session

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THE BRITISH EMPIRE, FRANCE, ITALY
and JAPAN,
These Powers being described in the present Treaty as the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers,
BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BRAZIL, CHINA, CUBA, ECUADOR, GREECE, GUATEMALA, HAITI, THE HEDJAZ, HONDURAS, LIBERIA, NICARAGUA, PANAMA,
1 S. Doc. 49, 66th Cong., 1st sess. (text of treaty); S. Doc. 50, 66th Cong., 1st sess.
(address of the President to the Senate delivered on July 10, 1919).
• Congressional Record, Nov. 19, 1919 (vol. 58, pt. 9), p. 8786 fT.
• Ibid., Mar. 19,1920 (vol. 59, pt. 5), p. 4598 fr.
'Ibid., Mar. 19, 1920 (vol. 59, pt. 5), p. 4600; filed with Unperfected Treaties 1-5
(Department of State archives).
G S. Ex. A, 66th Cong., 1st sess.; S. Doc. 66, 66th Cong., 1st sess.
e Congressional Record, Feb. 10, 1920 (vol. 59, pt. 3), p. 2678.
7 Ibid., Feb. 12, 1935 (vol. 79, pt. 2), p. 1825; filed with Unperfected Treaties G-9
and 1-5 (Department of State archives).
e For the treaty of Aug. 25, 1921, restoring friendly relations between the United States
and Gennany, see TS 658, post.

43

44

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

PERU, POLAND, PORTUGAL, ROUMANIA, THE SERB-CROAT-SLOVENE STATE,
SIAM, CZECHO-SLOVAKIA, and URUGUAY,
These Powers constituting with the Principal Powers mentioned above the
Allied and Associated Powers,
of the one part;
And GERMANY,
of the other part;
Bearing in mind that on the request of the Imperial German Government
an Armistice was granted on November 11, 1918,9 to Germany by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers in order that a Treaty of Peace might be
concluded with her, and
The Allied and Associated Powers being equally desirous that the war in
which they were successively involved directly or indirectly and which originated in the declaration of war by Austria-Hungary on July 28,1914, against
Serbia, the declaration of war by Germany against Russia on August 1, 1914,
and against France on August 3,1914, and in the invasion of Belgium, should
be replaced by a firm, just and durable Peace,
For this purpose the HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES represented as follows:
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, by:
The Honourable Woodrow WILSON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
acting in his own name and by his own proper authority;
The Honourable Robert LANSING, Secretary of State;
The Honourable Henry WHITE, formerly Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of the United States at Rome and Paris;
The Honourable Edward M. HOUSE;
General Tasker H. BLISS, Military Representative of the United States
on the Supreme War Council;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
IRELAND AND OF THE BRITISH DOMINIONS BEYOND THE SEAS, EMPEROR OF INDIA, by:
The Right Honourable David LLOYD GEORGE, M.P., First Lord of His
Treasury and Prime Minister;
The Right Honourable Andrew BONAR LAW, M.P., His Lord Privy Seal;
The Right Honourable Viscount MII,.NER, G.C.B., G.C.M.G., His Secretary of State for the Colonies;
The Right Honourable Arthur James BALFOUR, a.M., M.P., His Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs;
The Right Honourahle George Nicoll BARNES, M.P., Minister without
portfolio;
And
.• Ante, p. 9.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

45

for the DOMINION OF CANADA, by:
The Honourable Charles Joseph DOHERTY, Minister of Justice;
The Honourable Arthur Lewis SIFTON, Minister of Customs;
for the COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA, by:
The Right Honourable William Morris HUGHES, Attorney General and
Prime Minister;
The Right Honourable Sir Joseph COOK, G.C.M.G., Minister for the
Navy;
for the UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA, by:
General the Right Honourable Louis BOTHA, Minister of Native Affairs
and Prime Minister;
Lieutenant-General the Right Honourable Jan Christian SMUTS, KC.,
Minister of Defence;
for the DOMINION OF NEW ZEALAND, by:
The Right Honourable William Ferguson MASSEY, Minister of Labour
and Prime Minister;
for INDIA, by:
The Right Honourable Edwin Samuel MONTAGU, M. P., His Secretary of
State for India;
Major-General His Highness Maharaja Sir Ganga Singh Bahadur, Maharaja of BIKANER, G.C.S.L, G.C.LE., G.c.v.a., KC.B., A.D.C.;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, by:
Mr. Georges CLEMENCEAU, President of the Council, Minister of War;
Mr. Stephen PICHON, Ministerfor Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Louis-Lucien KLOTZ, Minister of Finance;
Mr. Andre TARDIEU, Commissary General for Franco-American Military
Affairs;
Mr. Jules CAMBON, Ambassador of France;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF ITALY, by:
Baron S. SONNINO, Deputy;
Marquis G. IMPERIALI, Senator, Ambassador of His Majesty the King of
Italy at London;
Mr. S. CRESPI, Deputy;
HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF JAPAN, by:
Marquis SAIONZI, formerly President of the Council of Ministers;
Baron MAKINO, formerly Minister for Foreign Affairs, Member of the
Diplomatic Council;
Viscount CHINDA, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of H.
M. the Emperor of Japan at London;
Mr. K MATSUI, Ambassador Extraorainary and Plenipotentiary of H. M.
the Emperor of Japan at Paris;

46

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Mr. H. IJUIN, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of H. M.
the Emperor of Japan at Rome;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BELGIANS, by:
Mr. Paul HYMANS, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister of State;
Mr. Jules van den HEUVEL, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, Minister of State;
Mr. Emile VANDERVELDE, Minister of Justice, Minister of State;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF BOLIVIA, by :
Mr. Ismael MONTES, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary
of Bolivia at Paris;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL, by:
Mr. Joao Pandia CALOGERAS, Deputy, formerly Minister of Finance;
Mr. Raul FERNANDES, Deputy;
Mr. Rodrigo Octavio de L. MENEZES, Professor of International Law of
Rio de Janeiro;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHINESE REPUBLIC, by:
Mr. Lou Tseng-Tsiang, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Chengting Thomas WANG, formerly Minister of Agriculture and
Commerce;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE CUBAN REPUBLIC, by:
Mr. Antonio Sanchez de BUSTAMANTE, Dean of the Faculty of Law in the
University of Havana, President of the Cuban Society of International
Law;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR, by:
Mr. Enrique DaRN Y DE ALSUA, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Ecuador at Paris;
HIs MAJESTY THE KING OF THE HELLENES, by:
Mr. Eleftherios K. VENISELOS, President of the Council of Ministers;
Mr. Nicolas POLITIS, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA, by:
Mr. Joaquin MENDEZ, formerly Minister of State for Public Works and
Public Instruction, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary
of Guatemala at Washington, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary on special mission at Paris;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF HAITI, by:
Mr. Tertullien GUILBAUD, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Haiti at Paris;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE HEDJAZ, by:
Mr. Rustem HAioAR;
Mr. Abdul Hadi AOUNI;

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

47

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS, by:
Dr. Policarpo BONILLA, on special mission to Washington, formerly President of the Republic of Honduras, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary ;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA, by:
The Honourable Charles Dunbar Burgess KING, Secretary of State;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA, by:
Mr. Salvador CHAMORRO, President of the Chamber of Deputies;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF PANAMA, by:
Mr. Antonio BURGOS, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary
of Panama at Madrid;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF PERU, by :
Mr. Carlos G. CANDAMO, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Peru at Paris;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE POLISH REPUBLIC, by:
Mr. Ignace J. PADEREWSKI, President of the Council of Ministers, Minister
for Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Roman DMOWSKI, President of the Polish National Committee;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC, by:
Dr. Affonso Augusto DA COSTA, formerly President of the Council of
Ministers;
Dr. Augusto Luiz Vieira SOARES, formerly Minister for Foreign Affairs;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF ROUMANIA, by:
Mr. Ion I. C. BRATIANO, President of the Council of Ministers, Minister
for Foreign Affairs;
General Constantin COANDA, Corps Commander, A.D.C. to the King,
formerly President of the Council of Ministers;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE SERBS, THE CROATS, AND THE SLOVENES,
by:
Mr. Nicholas P. PACHITCH, formerly President of the Council of Ministers;
Mr. Ante TRUMBIC, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Milenko VESNITCH, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of H. M. the King of the Serbs, the Croats and the Slovenes at
Paris;
HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF SIAM, by:
His Highness Prince CHAROON, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of H. M. the King of Siam at Paris;
His Serene Highness Prince Traidos PRABANDHU, Under Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs;

48

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

THE PRESIDENT OF THE CZECHo-SLOVAK REPUBLIC, by:
Mr. Karel KRAMAR, President of the Council of Ministers;
.
Mr. Eduard BENES, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY, by:
Mr. Juan Antonio BUERO, Minister for Foreign Affairs, formerly Minister
of Industry;
GERMANY, by:
Mr. Hermann MULLER, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Empire;
Dr. BELL, Minister of the Empire;
Acting in the name of the German Empire and of each and every component State,
WHO having communicated their full powers found in good and due form
have AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
From the coming into force of the present Treaty the state of war will
terminate. From that moment and subject to the provisions of this Treaty
official relations with Germany, and with any of the German States, will be
resumed by the Allied and Associated Powers.

PART I
THE COVENANT OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES,
In order to promote international co-operation and to achieve international peace and security
by the acceptance of obligations not to resort to war,
by the prescription of open, just and honourable relations between nations,
by the firm estal;>lishment of the understandings of international law as the
actual rule of conduct among Governments, and
by the maintenance of justice and a scrupulous respect for all treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another,
Agree to this Covenant of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 1
The original Members of the League of Nations shall be those of the
Signatories which are named in the Annex to this Covenant and also such
of those other States named in the Annex as shall accede without reservation to this Covenant. Such accession shall be effected by a Declaration deposited with the Secretariat within two months of the coming into force of
the Covenant. Norice thereof shall be sent to all other Members of the
League.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

49

Any fully self-governing State, Dominion or Colony not named in the
Annex may become a Member of the League if its admission is agreed to
by two-thirds of the Assembly, provided that it shall give effective guarantees
of its sincere intention to observe its international obligations, and shall accept
such regulations as may be prescribed by the League in regard to its military,
naval and air forces and armaments.
Any Member of the League may, after two years' notice of its intention
so to do, withdraw from the League, provided that all its international obligations and all its obligations under this Covenant shall have been fulfilled
at the time of its withdrawal.
ARTICLE

2

The action of the League under this Covenant shall be effected through
the instrumentality of an Assembly and of a Council, with a permanent
Secretariat.
ARTICLE 3
The Assembly shall consist of Representatives of the Members of the
League.
The Assembly shall meet at stated intervals and from time to time as occasion may require at the Seat of the League or at such other place as may be
decided upon.
The Assembly may deal at its meetings with any matter within the sphere
of action of the League or affecting the peace of the world.
At meetings of the Assembly each Member of the League shall have one
vote, and may have not more than three Representatives.
ARTICLE

4

The Council shall consist of Representatives of the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers, together with Representatives of fouf other Members of
the League. These four Members of the League shall be selected by the Assembly from time to time in its discretion. Until the appointment of the Representatives of the four Members of the League first selected by the Assembly,
Representatives of Belgium, Brazil, Spain and Greece shall be members of
the Council.
With the approval of the majority of the Assembly, the Council may name
additional Members of the League whose Representatives shall always be
members of the Council; the Council with like approval may increase the
number of Members of the League to be selected by the Assembly for representation on the Council.
The Council shall meet from time to time as occasion may require, and at
least once a year, at the Seat of the League, or at such other place as may
be decided upon.

50

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

The Council may deal at its meetings with any matter within the sphere
of action of the League or affecting the peace of the world.
Any Member of the League not represented on the Council shall be invited
to send a Representative to sit as a member at any meeting of the Council
during the consideration of matters specially affecting the interests of that
Member of the League.
At meetings of the Council, each Member of the League represented on
the Council shall have one vote, and may have not more than one Representative.
ARTICLE 5
Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Covenant or by the
terms of the present Treaty, decisions at any meeting of the Assembly or of
the Council shall require the agreement of all the Members of the League
represented at the meeting.
All matters of procedure at meetings of the Assembly or of the Council,
including the appointment of Committees to investigate particular matters,
shall be regulated by the Assembly or by the Council and may be decided by
a majority of the Members of the League represented at the meeting.
The first meeting of the Assembly and the first meeting of the Council shall
be summoned by the President of the United States of America.
ARTICLE

6

The permanent Secretariat shall be established at the Seat of the League.
The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary General and such secretaries and
staff as may be required.
The first Secretary General shall be the person named in the Annex; thereafter the Secretary General shall be appointed by the Council with the approval of the majority of the Assembly.
The secretaries and staff of the Secretariat shall be appointed by the Secretary General with the approval of the Council.
The Secretary General shall act in that capacity at all meetings of the
Assembly and of the Council.
The expenses of the Secretariat shall be borne by the Members of the
League in accordance with the apportionment of the expenses of the International Bureau of the Universal Postal Union.
ARTICLE

7

The Seat of the League is established at Geneva.
The Council may at any time decide that the Seat of the League shall
be established elsewhere.
All positions under or in connection with the League, including the Secretariat, shall be open equally to men and women.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

51

Representatives of the Members of the League and officials of the League
when engaged on the business of the League shall enjoy diplomatic privileges
and immunities.
The buildings and other property occupied by the League or its officials
or by Representatives attending its meetings shall be inviolable.
ARTICLE

8

The Members of the League recognise that the maintenance of peace requires the reduction of national armaments to the lowest point consistent with
national safety and the enforcement by common action of international
obligations.
The Council, taking account of the geographical situation and circumstances of each State, shall formulate plans for such reduction for the consideration and action of the several Governments.
Such plans shall be subject to reconsideration and revision at least every
ten years.
After these plans shall have been adopted by the several Governments,
the limits of armaments therein fixed shall not be exceeded without the concurrence of the Council.
The Members of the League agree that the manufacture by private enterprise of munitions and implements of war is open to grave objections. The
Council shall advise how the evil effects attendant upon such manufacture
can be prevented, due regard being had to the necessities of those Members
of the League which are not able to manufacture the munitions and implements of war necessary for their safety.
The Members of the League undertake to interchange full and frank
information as to the scale of their armaments, their military, naval and air
programmes and the condition of such of their industries as are adaptable to
war-like purposes.
ARTICLE

9

A permanent Commission shall be constituted to advise the Council on the
execution of the provisions of Articles 1 and 8 and on military, naval and air
questions generally.
ARTICLE 10
The Members of the League undertake to respect and preserve as against
external aggression the territorial integrity and existing political independence
of all Members of the League. In case of any such aggression or in case of
any threat or danger of such aggression the Council shall advise upon the
means by which this obligation shall be fulfilled.
ARTICLE

11

Any war or threat of war, whether immediately affecting any of the Members of the League or not, is hereby declared a matter of concern to the whole

52

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

League, and the League shall take any action that may be deemed wise and
effectual to safeguard the peace of nations. In case any such emergency
should arise the Secretary General shall on the request of any Member of the
League forthwith summon a meeting of the Council.
It is also declared to be the friendly right of each Member of the League
to bring to the attention of the Assembly or of the Council any circumstance
whatever affecting international relations which threatens to disturb international peace or the good understanding between nations upon which peace
depends.
ARTICLE 12
The Members of the League agree that if there should arise between them
any dispute likely to lead to a rupture, they will submit the matter either to
arbitration or to inquiry by the Council, and they agree in no case to resort
to war until three months after the award by the arbitrators or the report by
the Council.
In any case under this Article the award of the arbitrators shall be made
within a reasonable time, and the report of the Council shall be made within
six months after the submission of the dispute.
ARTICLE

13

The Members of the League agree that whenever any dispute shall arise
between them which they recognise to be suitable for submission to arbitration
and which cannot be satisfactorily settled by diplomacy, they will submit the
whole subject-matter to arbitration.
Disputes as to the interpretation of a treaty, as to any question of internationallaw, as to the existence of any fact which if established would constitute a breach of any international obligation, or as to the extent and nature
of the reparation to be made for any such breach, are declared to be among
those which are generally suitable for submission to arbitration.
For the consideration of any such dispute the court of arbitration to which
the case is referred shall be the Court agreed on by the parties to the dispute
or stipulated in any convention existing between them.
The Members of the League agree that they will carry out in full good
faith any award that may be rendered, and that they will not resort to war
against a Member of the League which complies therewith. In the event of
any failure to carry out such an award, the Council shall propose what steps
should be taken to give effect thereto.
ARTICLE

14

The Council shall formulate and submit to the Members of the League for
adoption plans for the establishment of a Permanent Court of International
Justice. The Court shall be competent to hear and determine any dispute of
an international character which the parties thereto submit to it. The Court

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

53

may also give an advisory opinion upon any dispute or question referred. to
it by the Council or by the Assembly.
ARTICLE

15

If there should arise between Members of the League any dispute likely to
lead to a rupture, which is not submitted to arbitration in accordance with
Article 13, the Members of the League agree that they will submit the matter
to the Council. Any party to the dispute may effect such submission by giving notice of the existence of the dispute to the Secretary General, who will
make all necessary arrangements for a full investigation and consideration
thereof.
For this purpose the parties to the dispute will communicate to the Secretary General, as promptly as possible, statements of their case with all the
relevant facts and papers, and the Council may forthwith direct the publication thereof.
The Council shall endeavour to effect a settlement of the dispute, and if
such efforts are successful, a statement shall be made public giving such facts
and explanations regarding the dispute and the terms of settlement thereof
as the Council may deem appropriate.
_
If the dispute is not thus settled, the Council either unanimously or by a
majority vote shall make and publish a report containing a statement of the
facts of the dispute and the recommendations which are deemed just and
proper in regard thereto. .
Any Member of the League represented on the Council may make public
a statement of the facts of the dispute and of its conclusions regarding the
same.
If a report by the Council is unanimously agreed to by the members thereof
other than the Representatives of one or more of the parties to the dispute,
the Members of the League agree that they will not go to war with any party
to the dispute which complies with the recommendations of the report.
If the Council fails to reach a report which is unanimously agreed to by the
members thereof, other than the Representatives of one or more of the parties
to the dispute, the Members of the League reserve to themselves the right to
tak~ such action as they shall consider necessary for the maintenance of right
and justice.
.
If the dispute between the parties is claimed by one of them, and is found
by the Council, to arise out of a matter which by international law is solely
within the domestic jurisdiction of that party, the Council shall so report, and
shall make no recommendation as to its settlement.
The Council may in any case under this Article refer the dispute to the Assembly. The dispute shall be so referred at the request of either party to the
dispute, provided that such request be made within fourteen days after the
submission of the dispute to the Council.

54

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

In any case referred to the Assembly, all the provisions of this Article and
of Article 12 relating to the action and powers of the Council shall apply
to the action and powers of the Assembly, provided that a report made by
the Assembly, if concurred in by the Representatives of those Members of the
League represented on the Council and of a majority of the other Members
of the League, exclusive in each case of the Representatives of the parties to
the dispute, shall have the same force as a report by the Council concurred in
by all the members thereof other than the Representatives of one or more of
the parties to the dispute.
ARTICLE 16
Should any Member of the League resort to war in disregard of its covenants under Articles 12, 13 or 15, it shall ipso facto be deemed to have committed an act of war against all other Members of the League, which hereby
undertake immediately to subject it to the severance of all trade or financial
relations, the prohibition of all intercourse between their nationals and the
nationals of the covenant-breaking State, and the prevention of all financial,
commercial or personal intercourse between the nationals of the covenantbreaking State and the nationals of any other State, whether a Member of
the League or not.
It shall be the duty of the Council in such case to recommend to the several Governments concerned what effective military, naval or air force the
Members of the League shall severally contribute to the armed forces to be
used to protect the covenants of the League.
The Members of the League agree, further, that they will mutually support one another in the financial and economic measures which are taken
under this Article, in order to minimise the loss and inconvenience resulting
from the above measures, and that they will mutually support one another
in resisting any special measures aimed at one of their number by the covenant-breaking State, and that they will take the necessary steps to afford
passage through their territory to the forces of any of the Members of the
League which are co-operating to protect the covenants of the League.
Any Member of the League which has violated any covenant of the
League may be declared to be no longer a Member of the League by a v~te
of the Council concurred in by the Representatives of all the other Members
of the League represented thereon.
ARTICLE

17

In the event of a dispute between a Member of the League and a State
which is not a Member of the League, or between States not Members of the
League, the State or States not Members of the League shall be invited to
accept the obligations of membership in the League for the purposes of such
dispute, upon such conditions as the Council may deem just. If such invita-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

55

tion is accepted, the provisions of Articles 12 to 16 inclusive shall be applied
with such modifications as may be deemed necessary by the Council.
Upon such invitation being given the Council shall immediately institute
an inquiry into the circumstances of the dispute and recommend such action
as may seem best and most effectual in the circumstances.
If a State so invited shall refuse to accept the obligations of membership
in the League for the purposes of such dispute, and shall resort to war
against a Member of the League, the provisions of Article 16 shall be applicable as against the State taking such action.
If both parties to the dispute when so invited refuse to accept the obligations of membership in the League for the purposes of such dispute, the
Council may take such measures and make such recommendations as will
prevent hostilities and will result in the settlement of the dispute.
ARTICLE

18

Every treaty or international engagement entered into hereafter by any
Member of the League shall be forthwith registered with the Secretariat and
shall as soon as possible be published by it. No such treaty or international
engagement shall be binding until so registered.
ARTICLE

19

The Assembly may from time to time advise the reconsideration by Members of the League of treaties which have become inapplicable and the con- .
sideration of international conditions whose continuance might endanger the
peace of the world.
ARTICLE

20

The Members of the League severally agree that this Covenant is accepted
as abrogating all obligations or understandings inter se which are inconsistent
with the terms thereof, and solemnly undertake that they will not hereafter
enter into any engagements inconsistent with the terms thereof.
In case any Member of the League shall, before becoming a Member of
the League, have undertaken any obligations inconsistent with the terms
of this Covenant, it shall be the duty of such Member to take immediate steps
to procure its release from such obligations.
.
ARTICLE

21

Nothing in this Covenant shall be deemed to affect the validity of international engagements, such as treaties of arbitration or regional understandings like the Monroe doctrine, for securing the maintenance of pea,ce.
ARTICLE

22

To those colonies and territories which as a consequence of the late war
have ceased to be under the sovereignty of the States which formerly governed

56

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

them and which are inhabited by peoples not yet able to stand by themselves
under the strenuous conditions of the modem world, there should be applied
the principle that the well-being and development of such peoples form a
sacred trust of civilisation and that securities for the performance of this trust
should be embodied in this Covenant.
The best method of giving practical effect to this principle is that the
tutelage of such peoples should be entrusted to advanced nations who by
reason of their resources, their experience or their geographical position can
best undertake this responsibility, and who are willing to accept it, and that
this tutelage should be exercised by them as Mandatories on behalf of the
League.
The character of the mandate must differ according to the stage of the
development of the people, the geographical situation of the territory, its
economic conditions and other similar circumstances.
Certain communities formerly belonging to the Turkish Empire have
reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations
can be provisionally recognised subject to the rendering of administrative
advice and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to stand
alone. The wishes of these communities must be a principal consideration in
the selection of the Mandatory.
Other peoples, especially those of Central Africa, are at such a stage that
the Mandatory must be responsible for the administration of the territory
under conditions which will guarantee freedom of conscience and religion,
subject only to the maintenance of public order and morals, the prohibition of
abuses such as the slave trade, the arms traffic and the liquor traffic, and the
prevention of the establishment of fortifications or military and naval bases
and of military training of the natives for other than police purposes and the
defence of territory, and will also secure equal opportunities for the trade and
commerce of other Members of the League.
There are territories, such as South-West Africa and certain of the South
Pacific Islands, which, owing to the sparseness of their population, or their
small size, or their remoteness from the centres of civilisation, or their geographical contiguity to the territory of the Mandatory, and other circumstances, can be best administered under the laws of the Mandatory as integral
portions of its territory, subject to the safeguards above mentioned in the
interests of the indigenous population.
In every case. of mandate, the Mandatory shall render to the Council an
annual report in reference to the territory committed to its charge.
The degree of authority, control, or administration to be exercised by the
Mandatory shall, if not previously agreed upon by the Members of the
League, be explicitly defined in each case by the Council.
A permanent Commission shall be constituted to receive and examine the
annual reports of the Mandatories and to advise the Council on all matters
relating to the observance of the mandates.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

57

23

Subject to and in accordance with the provisions of international conventions existing or hereafter to be agreed upon, the Members of the League:
(a) will endeavour to secure and maintain fair and humane conditions of
labour for men, women, and children, both in their own countries and in all
countries to which their commercial and industrial relations extend, and for
that purpose will establish and maintain the necessary international
organisations;
( b) undertake to secure just treatment of the native inhabitants of territories under their control;
(c) will entrust the League with the general supervision over the execution
of agreements with regard to the traffic in women and children, and the
traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs;
(d) will entrust the League with the general supervision of the trade in
arms and ammunition with the countries in which the control of this traffic
is necessary in the common interest;
(e) will make provision to secure and maintain freedom of communications and of transit and equitable treatment for the commerce of all Members of the League. In this connection, the special necessities of the regions
devastated during the war of 1914-1918 shall be borne in mind;
(f) will endeavour to take steps in matters of international concern for
the prevention and control of disease.
.

ARTICLE

24

There shall be placed under the direction of the League all international
bureaux already established by general treaties if the parties to such treaties
consent. All such international bureaux and all commissions for the regulation of matters of international interest hereafter constituted shall be placed
under the direction of the League.
In all matters of international interest which are regulated by general conventions but which are not placed under the control of international bureaux
or commissions, the Secretariat of the League shall, subject to the consent
of the Council and if desired by the parties, collect and distribute all relevant
information and shall render any other assistance which may be necessary
or desirable.
The Council may include as part of the expenses of the Secretariat the expenses of any bureau or commission which is placed under the direction of
the League.
ARTICLE 25
The Members of the League agree to encourage and promote the establishment and co-operation of duly authorised voluntary national Red Cross
219-9w6~9----5

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

58

organizations having as purposes the improvement of health, the prevention
of disease and the mitigation of suffering throughout the world.
ARTICLE 26
Amendments to this Covenant will take effect when ratified by the Members of the League whose Representatives compose the Council and by a
majority of the Members of the League whose Representatives compose the
Assembly.
No such amendment shall bind any Member of the League which signifies
its dissent therefrom, but in that case it shall cease to be a Member of the
League.
ANNEX
I.

ORIGINAL MEMBERS OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS SIGNATORIES
OF THE TREATY OF PEACE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BELGIUM
BOLIVIA
BRAZIL
BRITISH EMPIRE
CANADA
AUSTRALIA
SOUTH AFRICA
NEW ZEALAND
INDIA
CHINA
CUBA
ECUADOR
FRANCE
GREECE
GUATEMALA

HAITI
HEDJAZ
HONDURAS
ITALY
JAPAN
LIBERIA
NICARAGUA
PANAMA
PERU
POLAND
PORTUGAL
ROUMANIA
SERB-CROAT-SLOVENE STATE
SIAM
CZECHO-SLOVAKIA
URUGUAY

STATES INVITED TO ACCEDE TO THE COVENANT
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
CHILI
COLOMBIA
DENMARK
NETHERLANDS
NORWAY
PARAGUAY

PERSIA
SALVADOR
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
VENEZUELA

n. FIRST SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE. LEAGUE OF NATIONS
The Honourable Sir James Eric DRUMMOND, K.C.M.G., C.B.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

59

PART II
BOUNDARIES OF GERMANY
ARTICLE

27

The boundaries of Germany will be determined as follows:

1. With Belgium:
From the point common to the three frontiers of Belgium, Holland and
Germany and in a southerly direction:
the north-eastern boundary of the former territory of neutral M oresnet,
then the eastern boundary of the Kreis of Eupen, then the frontier between •
Belgium and the Kreis of Montjoie, then the north-eastern and eastern boundary of the Kreis of Malmedy to its junction with the frontier of Luxemburg.
2. With Luxemburg:
The frontier of August 3, 1914, to its junction with the frontier of France
ofthe 18th July, 1870.
3. With France:
The frontier of July 18, 1870, from Luxemburg to Switzerland with the
reservations made in Article 48 of Section IV (Saar Basin) of Part III.
4. With Switzerland:
The present frontier.
5. With Austria:
The frontier of August 3, 1914, from Switzerland to Czecho-Slovakia as
hereinafter defined.
6. With Czecho-Slovakia:
The frontier of August 3, 1914, between Germany and Austria from its
junction with the old administrative boundary separating Bohemia and the
province of Upper Austria to the point north of the salient of the old province
of Austrian Silesia situated at about 8 kilometres east of Neustadt.
7. With Poland:
From the point defined above to a point to be fixed on the ground about 2
kilometres east of Lorzendorf :
the frontier as it will be fixed in accordance with Article 88 of the present
Treaty;
thence in a northerly direction to the point where the administrative boundary of Posnania crosses the river Bartsch:
a line to be fixed on the ground leaving the following places in Poland:
Skorischau, Reichthal, Trembatschau, Kunzendorf, Schleise, Gross Kosel,
Schreibersdorf, Rippin, Fiirstlich-Niefken, Pawelau, Tscheschen, Konradau,
Johannisdorf, Modzenowe, Bogdaj, and in Germany: Lorzendorf, Kaulwitz,
Glausche, Dalbersdorf, Reesewitz, Stradam, Gross Wartenberg, Kraschen,
.
Neu Mittelwalde, Domaslawitz, Wedelsdorf, Tscheschen Hammer;

60

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

thence the administrative boundary of Posnania north-westwards to the
point where it cuts the Rawitsch-Herrnstadt railway;
thence to the point where the administrative boundary of Posnania cuts the
Reisen-Tschirnau road:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing west of Triebusch and Gabel and
east of Saborwitz;
thence the administrative boundary of Posnania to its junction with the
eastern administrative boundary of the Kreis of Fraustadt;
thence in a north-westerly direction to a point to be chosen on the road
between the villages of Unruhstadt and Kopnitz:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing west of Geyersdorf, Brenno, FeWen,
Altkloster, KIebel, and east of Ulbersdorf, Buchwald, lIgen, Weine, Lupitze,
Schwenten;
thence in a northerly direction to the northernmost point of Lake Chlop:
a line to be fixed on the ground following the median line of the lakes;
the town and the station of Bentschen however (including the junction of
the lines Schwiebus-Bentschen and Ziillichau-Bentschen) remaining in Polish
territory;
thence in a north-easterly direction to the point of junction of the boundaries of the Kreise of Schwerin, Birnbaum and Meseritz:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing east of Betsche;
thence in a northerly direction the boundary separating the Kreise of
Schwerin and Birnbaum, then in an easterly direction the northern boundary
of Posnania to the point where it cuts the river Netze;
thence upstream to its confluence with the Kiiddow:
the course of the Netze;
thence upstream to a point to be chosen about 6 kilometres southeast of
Schneidemiihl:
the course of the Kiiddow;
thence north-eastwards to the most southern point of the re-entrant of the
northern boundary of Posnania about 5 kilometres west of Stahren:
a line to be fixed on the ground leaving the Schneidemiihl-Konitz railway
in this area entirely in German territory;
thence the boundary of Posnania north-eastwards to the point of the salient
it makes about 15 kilometres east of Flatow;
thence north-eastwards to the point where the river Kamionka meets the
southern boundary of the Kreis of Konitz abbut 3 kilometres north-east of
Grunau:
a line to be fixed on the ground leaving the following places to Poland:
Jasdrowo, Gr. Lutau, Kl. Lutau, Wittkau, and to Germany: Gr. Butzig,
Cziskowo, Battrow, Bock, Grunau;
thence in a northerly direction the boundary between the Kreise of Konitz
and Schlochau to the point where this boundary cuts the river Brahe;

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

61

thence to a point on the boundary of Pomerania 15 kilometres east of
Rummelsburg:
a line to be fixed on the ground leaving the following places in Poland:
Konarzin, Kelpin, Ad!. Briesen, and in Germany: Sampohl, Neuguth, Steinfort, Gr. Peterkau;
then the boundary of Pomerania in an easterly direction to its junction
with the boundary between the Kreis of Konitz and Schlochau;
thence northwards the boundary between Pomerania and West Prussia
to the point on the river Rheda about 3 kilometres north-west of Gohra
where that river is joined by a tributary from the north-west;
thence to a point to be selected in the bend of the Piasnitz river about 1}t2
kilometres north-west of Warschkau :
a line to be fixed on the ground;
thence this river downstream, then the median line of Lake Zarnowitz, then
the old boundary of West Prussia to the Baltic Sea.
8. With Denmark:
The frontier as it will be fixed in accordance with Articles 109 to 111 of
Part III, Section XII (Schleswig).
ARTICLE

28

The boundaries of East Prussia, with the reservations made in Section IX
(East Prussia) of Part III, will be determined as follows:
from a point on the coast of the Baltic Sea about 1}t2 kilometres north of
Probbernau church in a direction of about 159° East from true North:
a line to be fixed on the ground for about 2 kilometres;
thence in a straight line to the light at the bend of the Elbing Channel in
approximately latitude 54°19}t2' North, longitude 19°26' East of Greenwich;
thence to the easternmost mouth of the Nogat River at a bearing of approximately 209° East from true North;
thence up the course of the Nogat River to the point where the latter leaves
the Vistula (Weichsel) ;
thence up the principal channel of navigation of the Vistula, then the
southern boundary of the Kreis of Marienwerder, then that of the Kreis of
Rosenberg eastwards to the point where it meets the old boundary of East
Prussia.
thence the old boundary between East and West Prussia, then the boundary
between the Kreise of Osterode and Neidenburg, then the course of the river
Skottau downstream, then the course of the Neide upstream to a point situated
about 5 kilometres west of Bialutten being the nearest point to the old frontier
of Russia;

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

62

thence in an easterly direction to a point immediately south of the intersection of the road Neidenburg-Mlava with the old frontier of Russia:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing north of Bialutten;
thence the old frontier of Russia to point east of Schmalleningken, then
the principal channel of navigation of the Nieman (Memel) downstream,
then the Skierwieth arm of the delta to the Kurisches Haff ;
thence a straight line to the point where the eastern shore of the Kurische
Nehrung meets the administrative boundary about 4 kilometres south-west
of Nidden;
thence this administrative boundary to the western shore of the Kurische
Nehrung.
ARTICLE 29

a

The boundaries as described above are drawn in red on a one-in-a-million
map which is annexed to the present Treaty (Map No.1.) 10
In the case of any discrepancies between the text of the Treaty and this
map or any other map which may be annexed, the text will be final.
ARTICLE

30

In the case of boundaries which are defined by a waterway, the terms
"course" and "channel" used in the present Treaty signify: in the case of
non-navigable rivers, the median line of the waterway or of its principal arm,
and, in the case of navigable rivers, the median line of the principal channel
of navigation. It will rest with the Boundary Commissions provided by the
present Treaty to specify in each case whether the frontier line shall follow
any changes of the course or channel which may take place or whether it
shall be definitely fixed by the position of the course or channel at the time
when the present Treaty comes into force.
PART III

POLITICAL CLAUSES FOR EUROPE
SECTION I

Belgium
ARTICLE

31

Germany, recognizing that the Treaties of April 19, 1839, which established the status of Belgium before the war, no longer conform to the requirements of the situation, consents to the abrogation of the said Treaties
and undertakes immediately to recognize and to observe whatever conventions may be entered into by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, or
10

Printed in S. Doc. 51, 66th Cong., 1st sess., between pp. 52 and 53.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

63

by any of them, in concert with the Governments of Belgium and of the
Netherlands, to replace the said Treaties of 1839. If her formal adhesion
should be required to such conventions or to any of their stipulations, Germany undertakes immediately to give it.
ARTICLE

32

Germany recognizes the full sovereignty of Belgium over the whole of the
contested territory of Moresnet (called M oresnet neutre).
ARTICLE

33

Germany renounces in favour of Belgium all rights and title over the territory of Prussian Moresnet situated on the west of the road from Liege to
Aix-Ia-Chapelle; the road will belong to Belgium where it bounds this
territory.
ARTICLE 34
Germany renounces in favour of Belgium all rights arid title over the
territory comprising the whole of the Kreise of Eupen and of Malmedy.
During the six months after the coming into force of this Treaty, registers
will be opened by the Belgian authority at Eupen and Malmedy in which the
inhabitants of the above territory will be entitled to record in writing a desire
to see the whole or part of it remain under German sovereignty.
The results of this public expression of opinion will be communicated by
the Belgian Government to the League of Nations, and Belgium undertakes
to accept the decision of the League.
ARTICLE

35

A Commission of seven persons, five of whom will be appointed by the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers, one by Germany and one by
Belgium, will be set up fifteen days after the coming into force of the present
Treaty to settle on the spot the new frontier line between Belgium and
Germany, taking into account the economic factors and the means of
communication.
Decisions will be taken by a majority and will be binding on the parties
concerned.
ARTICLE 36
When the transfer .of the sovereignty over the territories referred to above
has become definite, German nationals habitually resident in the territories
will definitely acquire Belgian nationality ipso facto, and will lose their
German ~ationality.
Nevertheless, German nationals who became resident in the territories
after A~gust 1, 1914, shall not obtain Belgian nationality without a permit
from the Belgian Government.

64

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

37

Within the two years following the definitive transfer of the sovereignty
over the territories assigned to Belgium under the present Treaty, German
nationals over 18 years of age habitually resident in those territories will be
entitled to opt for German nationality.
Option by a husband will cover his wife, and option by parents will cover
theil' children under 18 years of age.
Persons who have exercised the above right to opt must within the ensuing
twelve months transfer their place of residence to Germany.
They will be entitled to retain their immovable property in the territories
acquired by Belgium. They may carry with them their movable property of
every description. No export or import duties may be imposed upon them in
connection with the removal of such property.
ARTICLE

38

The German Government will hand over without delay to the Belgian
Government the archives, registers, plans, title deeds and documents of every
kind concerning the civil, military, financial, judiCIal or other administrations
in the territory transferred to Belgian sovereignty.
The German Government will likewise restore to the Belgian Government
the archives and documents of every kind carried off during the war by the
German authorities from the Belgian public administrations, in particular
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at Brussels.
ARTICLE

39

The proportion and nature of the financial liabilities of Germany and of
Prussia which Belgium will have to bear on account of the territories ceded
to her shall be fixed in conformity with Articles 254 and 256 of Part IX
(Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty.
SECTION II

Luxemburg
ARTICLE

40

With regard to the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, Germany renounces the
benefit of all the provisions inserted in her favour in the Treaties of February
8, 1842, April 2, 1847, October 20-25, 1865, August 18, 1866, February 21
and May 11, 1867, May 10, 1871, June 11, 1872, and November 11, 1902,
and in all Conventions consequent upon such Treaties.
Germany recognizes that the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg ceased to form
part of the German Zollverein as from January 1, 1919, renounces all rights
to the exploitation of the railways, adheres to the termination of the regime
of neutrality of the Grand Duchy, and accepts in advance all international

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

65

arrangements which may be concluded by the Allied and Associated Powers
relating to the Grand Duchy.
ARTICLE 41
Germany undertakes to grant to the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, when
a demand to that effect is made to her by the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers, the rights and advantages stipulated in favour of such Powers or
their nationals in the present Treaty with regard to economic questions, to
questions relative to transport and to aerial navigation.
SECTION III

Left Bank of the Rhine
ARTICLE

42

Germany is forbidden to maintain or construct any fortifications either on
the left bank of the Rhine or on the right bank to the west of a line drawn
50 kilometres to the East of the Rhine.
ARTICLE

43

In the area defined above the maintenance and the assembly of armed
forces, either permanently or temporarily, and military manreuvres of any
kind, as well as the upkeep of all permanent works for mobilization, are in
the same way forbidden.
ARTICLE 44
In case Germany violates in any manner whatever the provisions of Articles
42 and 43, she shall be regarded as committing a hostile act against the
Powers signatory of the present Treaty and as calculated to disturb the peace
of the world.
SECTION IV

Saar Basin
ARTICLE

45

As compensation for the destruction of the coal-mines in the north of
France and as part payment towards the total reparation due from Germany
for the damage resulting from the war, Germany cedes to France in full and
absolute possession, with exclusive rights of exploitation, unencumbered and
free from all debts and charges of any kind, the coal-mines situated in the
Saar Basin as defined in Article 48.
ARTICLE

46

In order to assure the rights and welfare of the population and to guarantee
to France complete freedom in working the mines, Germany agrees to the
provisions of Chapters I and II of the Annex hereto.
219-91G--G9~G

66

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

47

In order to make in due time permanent provision for the government of
the Saar Basin in accordance with the wishes of the populations, France and
Germany agree to the provisions of Chapter III of the Annex hereto.
ARTICLE

48

The boundaries of the territory of the Saar Basin, as dealt with in the
present stipulations, will be fixed as follows:
On the south and south-west: by the frontier of France as fixed by the
present Treaty.
On the north-west and north: by a line following the·northern administrative boundary of the Kreis of Merzig from the point where it leaves the French
frontier to the point where it meets the administrative boundary separating the
commune of Saarholzbach from the commune of Britten; following this communal boundary southwards and reaching the administrative boundary of
the canton of Merzig so as to include in the territory of the Saar Basin the
canton of Mettlach, with the exception of the commune of Britten; following
successively the northern administrative boundaries of the cantons of Merzig
and Haustadt, which are incorporated in the aforesaid Saar Basin, then successively the administrative boundaries separating the Kreise of Sarrelouis,
Ottweiler and Saint-Wendel from the Kreise of Merzig, Treves (Trier) and
the Principality of Birkenfeld as far as a point situated about 500 metres north
of the village of Furschweiler (viz., the highest point of the Metzelberg).
On the north-east and eCMt: from the last point defined above to a point
about 3 ~ kilometres east-north-east of Saint-Wendel:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing east of Furschweiler, west of Roschberg, east of points 418, 329 (south of Roschberg), west of Leitersweiler,
north-east of point 464, and following the line of the crest southwards to its
junction with the administrative boundary of the Kreis of Kusel;
thence in a southerly direction the boundary of the Kreis of Kusel, then the
boundary of the Kreis of Homburg towards the south-south-east to a point
situated about 1000 metres west of Dunzweiler;
thence to a point about 1 kilometre south of Hornbach:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing through point 424 (about 1000
metres south-east of Dunzweiler), point 363 (Fuchs-Berg), point 322 (southwest of Waldmohr), then east of Jagersburg and Erbach, then encircling
Homburg, passing through the points 361 (about 2 ~ kilometres north-east
by east of that town), 342 (about 2 kilometres south-east of that town), 347
(Schreiners-Berg), 356, 350 (about 1 ~ kilometres south-east of Schwarzenbach), then passing east of Einod, south-east of points 322 and 333, about 2
kilometres east of Webenheim, about 2 kilometres .east of Mimbach, passing
east of the plateau which is traversed by the road from Mimbach to Bock·

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

67

weiler (so as to include this road in the territory of the Saar Basin), passing
immediately north of the junction of the roads from Bockweiler and Altheim
situated about 2 kilometres north of Altheim, then passing south of Ringweilerhof and north of point 322, rejoining the frontier of France at the angle
which it makes about 1 kilometre south of Rombach (see Map No.2 11 scale
11100,000 annexed to the present Treaty).
A commission composed of five members, one appointed by France; one by
Germany, and three by the Council of the League of Nations, which will
select nationals of other Powers, will be constituted within fifteen days from
the coming into force of the present Treaty, to trace on the spot the frontier
line described above.
In those parts of the preceding line which do not coincide with administrative' boundaries, the Commission will endeavour to keep to the line indicated, while taking into consideration, so far as is possible, local economic
interests and existing communal boundaries.
The decisions of this Commission will be taken by a majority, and will be
binding on the parties concerned.
ARTICLE

49

Germany renounces in favour of the League of Nations, in the capacity of
trustee, the government of the territory defined above.
At the end of fifteen years from the coming into force of the present Treaty
the inhabitants of the said territory shall be called upon to indicate the
sovereignty under which they desire to be placed.
ARTICLE

50

The stipulations under which the cession of the mines in the Saar Basin
shall be carried out, together with the measures intended to guarantee the
rights and the well-being 6f the inhabitants and the government of the territory, as well as the conditions in accordance with which the plebiscite hereinbefore provided for is to be made, are laid down in the Annex hereto. This
Annex shall be considered as an integral part of the present Treaty, and Germany declares her adherence to it.
ANNEX

In accordance with the provisions of Articles 45 to 50 of the present Treaty,
the stipulations under which the cession by Germany to France of the mines
of the Saar Basin will be effected, as well as the measures intended to ensure
respect for the rights and well-being of the population and the government of
the territory, and the conditions in which the inhabitants will be called upon
to indicate the sovereignty under which they may wish to be placed, have
been laid down as follows:
1.1

Printed in S: Doc. 51, 66th Cong., 1st sess., between pp. 64 and 65.

68

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
CHAPTER

I

Cession and Exploitation of Mining Property
1
From the date of the coming into force of the present Treaty, all the deposits of coal situated within the Saar Basin as defined in Article 48 of the
said Treaty, become the complete and absolute property of the French State.
The French State will have the right of working or not working the said
mines, or of transferring to a third party the right of working them, without
having to obtain any previous authorisation or to fulfil any fom1alities.
The French State may always require that the German mining laws and
regulations referred to below shall be applied in order to ensure the determination of its rights.

2
The right of ownership of the French State will apply not only to the deposits which are free and for which concessions have not yet been granted,
but also to the deposits for which concessions have already been granted,
whoever may be the present proprietors, irrespective of whether they belong
to the Prussian State, to the Bavarian State, to other States or bodies, to companies or to individuals, whether they have been worked or not, or whether
a right of exploitation distinct from the right of the owners of the surface of
the soil has or has not been recognized.

3
As far as concerns the mines which are being worked, the transfer of the
ownership to the French State will apply to all the accessories and subsidiaries
of the said mines, in particular to their plant and equipment both on and
below the surface, to their extracting machinery, their plants for transforming coal into electric power, coke and by-products, their workshops, means
of communication, electric lines, plant for catching and distributing water,
land, buildings such as offices, managers', employees' and workmen's dwellings, schools, hospitals and dispensaries, their stocks and supplies of every
description, their archives and plans, and in general everything which those
who own or exploit the mines possess or enjoy for the purpose of exploiting the
mines and their accessories and subsidiaries.
The transfer will apply also to the debts owing for products delivered before the entry into possession by the French State, and after the signature of
the present Treaty, and to deposits of money made by customers, whose
rights will be guaranteed by the French State.
4

The French State will acquire the property free and clear of all debts and
charges. Nevertheless, the rights acquired, or in course of being acquired, by

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

69

the employees of the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries at the date
of the coming into force of the present Treaty, in connection with pensions
for old age or disability, will not be affected. In return, Germany must pay
over to the French State a sum representing the actuarial amounts to which
the said employees are entitled.

5
The value of the property thus ceded to the French State will be determined by the Reparation Commission referred to in Article 233 of Part VIII
(Reparation) of the present Treaty.
This value shall be credited to Germany in part payment of the amount
due for reparation.
It will be for Germany to indemnify the proprietors or parties concerned,
whoever they may be.
6
No tariff shall be established on the German railways and canals which
may directly or indirectly discriminate to the prejudice of the transport of the
personnel or products of the mines and their accessories or subsidiaries, or of
the material necessary to their exploitation. Such transport shall enjoy all the
rights and privileges which any international railway conventions may
guarantee to similar products of French origin.

7
The equipment and personnel necessary to ensure the despatch and transport of the products of the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries, as
well as the carriage of workmen and employees, will be provided by the local
railway administration of the Basin.

8
No obstacle shall be placed in the way of such improvements of railways
or waterways as the French State may judge necessary to assure the despatch
and the transport of the products of the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries, such as double trackage, enlargement of stations, and construction
of yards and appurtenances. The distribution of expenses will, in the event
of disagreement, be submitted to arbitration.
The French State may also establish any new means of communication,
such as roads, electric lines and telephone connections which it may consider
necessary for the exploitation of the mines.
It may exploit freely and without any restrictions the means of communi. cation of which it may become the owner, particularly those connecting the
mines and their accessories and subsidiaries with the means of communication situated in French territory.

70

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

9
The French State shall always be entitled to demand the application of the
German mining laws and regulations in force on November 11, 1918, excepting provisions adopted exclusively in view of the state of war, with a view
to the acquisition of such land as it may judge necessary for the exploitation
of the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries.
The payment for damage caused to immovable property by the working
of the said mines and their accessories and subsidiaries shall be made in
accordance with the German mining laws and regulations above referred to.

lD
Every person whom the French State may substitute for itself as regards
the whole or part of its rights to the exploitation of the mines and their
accessories and subsidiaries shall enjoy the benefit of the privileges provided.
in this Annex.
11
The mines and other immovable property which become the property of
the French State may never be made the subject of measures of forfeiture,
forced sale, expropriation or requisition, nor of any other measure affecting
the right of property.
The personnel and the plant connected with the exploitation of these mines
or their accessories and subsidiaries, as well as the product extracted from the
mines or manufactured in their accessories and subsidiaries, may not at any
time be made the subject of any measures of requisition.

12
The exploitation of the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries, which
become the property of the French State, will continue, subject to the provisions of paragraph 23 below, to be subject to the regime established by the
German laws and regulations in force on November 11, 1918, excepting
provisions adopted exclusively in view of the state of war.
The rights of the workmen shall similarly be maintained, subject to the
provisions of the said paragraph 23, as established on November 11, 1918,
by the German laws and regulations above referred to.
No impediment shall be placed in the way of the introduction or employment in the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries of workmen from
without the Basin.
The employees and workmen of French nationality shall have the right
to belong to French labour unions.
13
The amount contributed by the mines and their accessories and subsidiaries, either to the local budget of the territory of the Saar Basin or to the
communal funds, shall be fixed with due regard to the ratio of the value of
the mines to the total taxable wealth of the Basin.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

71

14
The French State shall always have the right of establishing and maintaining, as incidental to the mines, primary or technical schools for its employees
and their children, and of causing instruction therein to be given in the
French language, in accordance with such curriculum and by such teachers
as it may select.
It shall also have the right to establish and maintain hospitals, dispensaries,
workmen's houses and gardens and other charitable and social institutions.

15
The French State shall enjoy complete liberty with respect to the distribution, despatch and sale prices of the products of the mines and their accessories
and subsidiaries.
Nevertheless, whatever may be the total product of the mines, the French
Government undertakes that the requirements of local consumption for industrial and domestic purposes shall always be satisfied in the proportion
existing in 1913 between the amount consumed locally and the total output
of the Saar Basin.
CHAPTER II

Government of the Territory of the Saar Basin
16
The Government of the territory of the Saar Basin shall be entrusted to a
Commission representing the League of Nations. This Commission shall sit
in the territory of the Saar Basin.

17
The Governing Commission provided for by paragraph 16 shall consist
of five members chosen by the Council of the League of Nations, and will
include one citizen of France, one native inhabitant of the Saar Basin, not a
citizen of France, and three members belonging to three countries other than
France or Germany.
The members of the Governing Commission shall be appointed for one
year and may be re-appointed. They can be removed by the Council of the
League of Nations, which will provide for their replacement.
The members of the Governing Commission will be entitled to a salary
which will be fixed by the Council of the League of Nations, and charged
on the local revenues.

18
The Chairman of the Governing Commission shall be appointed for one
year from among the members of the Commission by the Council of the
League of Nations and may be re-appointed.
The Chairman will act as the executive of the Commission.

·72

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

19
Within the territory of the Saar Basin the Governing Commission shall
have all the powers of government hitherto belonging to the German Empire,
Prussia, or Bavaria, including the appointment and dismissal of officials, and
the creation of such administrative and representative bodies as it may deem
necessary.
It shall have full powers to administer and operate the railways, canals and
the different public services.
Its decisions shall be taken by a majority.

20
Germany will place at the disposal of the Governing Commission all official documents and archives under the control of Germany, of any German
State, or of any local authority, which relate to the territory of the Saar
Basin or to the rights of the inhabitants thereof.

21
It will be the duty of the Governing Commission to ensure, by such means
and under such conditions as it may deem suitable, the protection abroad of
the interests of the inhabitants of the territory of the Saar Basin.

22
The Governing Commission shall have the full right of user of all property,
other than mines, belonging, either in public or in private domain, to the Government of the German Empire, or the Government of any German State, in
the territory of the Saar Basin.
As regards the railways an equitable apportionment of rolling stock shall
be made by a mixed Commission on which the Government of the territory
of the Saar Basin and the German railways will be represented.
Persons, goods, vessels, carriages, wagons and mails coming from or going
to the Saar Basin shall enjoy all the rights and privileges relating to transit
and transport which are specified in the provisions of Part XII (Ports, Waterways and Railways) of the present Treaty.

23
The laws and regulations in force on November 11, 1918, in the territory
of the Saar Basin (except those enacted in consequence of the state of war)
shall continue to apply.
If, for general reasons or to bring these laws and regulations into accord
with the provisions of the present Treaty, it is necessary to introduce modifications, these shall. be decided on, and put into effect by the Governing
Commission, after consultation with the elected representatives of the inhabitants in such a manner as the Commission may determine.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

73

No modification may be made in the legal regime for the exploitation of
the mines, provided for in paragraph 12, without the French State being
previously consulted, unless such modification results from a general regulation respecting labour adopted by the League of Nations.
In fixing the conditions and hours of labour for men, women and children,
the Governing Commission is to take into consideration the wishes expressed
by the local labour organisations, as well as the principles adopted by the
League of Nations.

24
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 4, no rights of the inhabitants of the
Saar Basin acquired or in process of acquisition at the date of the coming into
force of this Treaty, in respect of any insurance system of Germany or in respect of any pension of any kind are affected by any of the provisions of the
present Treaty.
Germany and the Government of the territory of the Saar Basin will preserve and continue all of the aforesaid rights.

25
The civil and criminal courts existing in the territory of the Saar Basin
shall continue.
A civil and criminal court will be established by the Governing Commission to hear appeals from the decisions of the said courts and to decide
matters for which these courts are not competent.
The Governing Commission will be responsible for settling the organisation
and jurisdiction of the said court.
Justice will be rendered in the name of the Governing Commission.

26
The Governing Commission will alone have the power of levying taxes and
dues in the territory of the Saar Basin.
These ,taxes and dues will be exclusively applied to the needs of the
territory.
The fiscal system existing on November 11, 1918, will be maintained as
far as possible, and no new tax except customs duties may be imposed without previously consulting the elected representatives of the inhabitants.

27
The present stipulations will not affect the existing nationality of the inhabitants of the territory of the Saar Basin.
No hindrance shall be placed in the way of those who wish to acquire a
different nationality, but in such case the acquisition of the new nationality
will involve the loss of any other.

74

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

28
Under the control of the Governing Commission the inhabitants will retain their local assemblies, their religious liberties, their schools and their
language.
The right of voting will not be exercised for any assemblies other than the
local assemblies, and will belong to every inhabitant over the age of twenty
years, without distinction of sex.

29
Any of the inhabitants of the Saar Basin who may desire to leave the territory will have full liberty to retain in it their immovable property or to sell
it at fair prices, and to remove their movable property free of any charges.

30
There will be no military service, whether compulsory or voluntary, in the
territory of the Saar Basin, and the construction of fortifications therein is
forbidden.
Only a local gendarmerie for the maintenance of order may be established.
It will be the duty of the Governing Commission to provide in all cases for
the protection of persons and property in the Saar Basin.
31
The territory of the Saar Basin as defined by Article 48 of the present
Treaty shall be subjected to the French customs regime. The receipts from
the customs duties on goods intended for local consumption shall be included
in the budget of the said territory after deduction of all costs of collection.
No export tax shall be imposed upon metallurgical products or coal exported from the said territory to Germany, nor upon German exports for the
use of the industries of the territory of the Saar Basin.
Natural or manufactured products originating in the Basin in transit over
German territory and, similarly, German products in transit over the territory
of the Basin shall be free of all customs duties.
Products which both originate in and pass from the Basin into Germany
shall be free of import duties for a period of five years from the date of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, and during the same period articles imported from Germany into the territory of the Basin for local consumption shall likewise be free of import duties.
During these five years the French Government reserves to itself the right
of limiting to the annual average of the quantities imported into AlsaceLorraine and France in the years 1911 to 1913 the quantities which may be
sent into France of all articles coming from the Basin which include raw
materials and semi-manufactured goods imported duty free from Germany.
Such average shall be determined after reference to all available official information and statistics.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

75

32
No prohibition or restriction shall be imposed upon the circulation of
French money in the territory of the Saar Basin.
The French State shall have the right to use French money in all purchases, payments and contracts connected with the exploitation of the mines
or their accessories and subsidiaries.

33
The Governing Commission shall have power to decide all questions arising from the interpretation of the preceding provisions.
France and Germany agree that any dispute involving a difference of
opinion as to the interpretation of the said provisions shaH in the same way
be submitted to the Governing Commission, and the decision of a majority
of the Commission shall be binding on both countries.
CHAPTER

III

Plebiscite
34
At the termination of a period of fifteen years from the coming into force
of the present Treaty, the population of the territory of the Saar Basin will be
called upon to indicate their desires in the following manner:
A vote will take place by communes or districts, on the three following
alternatives: (a) maintenance of the regime established by the present Treaty
and by this Annex; (b) union with France; (c) union with Germany.
All persons without distinction of sex, more than twenty years old at the
date of the voting, resident in the territory at the date of'the signature of the
present Treaty, will have the right to vote.
The other conditions, methods and the date of the voting shall be fixed
by the Council of the League of Nations in such a way as to secure the freedom, secrecy and trustworthiness of the voting.

35
The League of Nations shall decide on the sovereignty under which the
territory is to be placed, taking into account the wishes of the inhabitants as
expressed by the voting:
(a) If, for the whole or part of the territory, the League of Nations decides
in favour of the maintenance of the regime established by the present Treaty
and this Annex, Germany hereby agrees to make such renunciation of her
sovereignty in favour of the League of Nations as the latter shall deem necessary. It will be the duty of the League of Nations to take appropriate steps
to adapt the regime definitively adopted to the permanent welfare of the
territory and the general interest;

76

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

(b) If, for the whole or part of the territory, the League of Nations decides
in favour of union with France, Germany hereby agrees to cede to France in
accordance with the decision of the League of Nations all rights and title over
the territory specified by the League;
(c) If, for the whole or part of the territory, the League of Nations decides
in favour of union with Germany, it will be the duty of the League of Nations
to cause the German Government to be reestablished in the government of
the territory specified by the League.
36
If the League of Nations decides in favour of the union of the whole or
part of the territory of the Saar Basin with Germany, France's rights of ownership in the mines situated in such part of the territory will be repurchased by
Germany in their entirety at a price payable in gold. The price to be paid
will be fixed by three experts, one nominated by Germany, one by France,
and one, who shall be neither a Frenchman nor a German, by the Council
of the League of Nations; the decision of the experts will be given by a
majority.
The obligation of Germany to make such payment shall be taken into
account by the Reparation Commission, and for the purpose of this payment
Germany may create a prior charge upon her assets or revenues upon such
detailed terms as shall be agreed to by the Reparation Commission.
If, nevertheless, Germany after a period of one year from the date on which
the payment becomes due shall not have effected the said payment, the Reparation Commission shall do so in accordance with such instructions as may
be given by the League of Nations, and, if necessary, by liquidating that part
of the mines which is in question.
37
If, in consequence of the repurchase provided for in paragraph 36, the
ownership of the mines or any part of them is transferred to Germany, the
French State and French nationals shall have the right to purchase such
amount of coal of the Saar Basin as their industrial and domestic needs are
found at that time to require. An equitable arrangement regarding amounts
of coal, duration of contract, and prices will be fixed in due time by the Council of the League of Nations.
38
It is understood that France and Germany may, by special agreements concluded before the time fixed for the payment of the price for the repurchase
of the mines, modify the provisions of paragraphs 36 and 37.

·39
The Council of the League of Nations shall make such provisions as may
be necessary for the establishment of the regime which is to take effect after

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

77

the decisions of the League of Nations mentioned in paragraph 35 have become operative, including an equitable apportionment of any obligations of
the Government of the territory of the Saar Basin arising from loans raised
by the Commission or from other causes.
From the coming into force of the new regime, the powers of the Governing Commission will terminate, except in the case provided for in paragraph
35 (a).

40
In all matters dealt with in the present Annex, the decisions of the Council
of the League of Nations will be taken by a majority.
SECTION

V

Alsace-Lorraine

The HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES, recognising the moral obligation to
redress the wrong done by Germany in 1871 both to the rights of France and
to the wishes of the population of Alsace and Lorraine, which were separated
from their country in spite of the solemn protest of their representatives at
the Assembly of Bordeaux,
Agree upon the following Articles:
ARTICLE 51
The territories which were ceded to Germany in accordance with the
Preliminaries of Peace signed at Versailles on February 26, 1871, and the
Treaty of Frankfort of May 10, 1871, are restored to French sovereignty as
from the date ofthe Armistice of November 11,1918.
The provisions of the Treaties establishing the delimitation of the frontiers
before 1871 shall be restored.
ARTICLE 52
The German Government shall hand over without delay to the French
Government all archives, registers, plans, titles and documents of every kind
concerning the civil, military, financial, judicial or other administrations of
the territories restored to French sovereignty. If any of these documents,
archives, registers, titles or plans have been misplaced, they will be restored
by the German Government on the 'demand of the French Government.
ARTICLE 53
Separate agreements shall be made between France and Germany dealing
with the interests of the inhabitants of the territories referred to in Article 51,
particularly as regards their civil rights, their business and the exercise of
their professions, it being understood that Germany undertakes as from the
present date to recognise and accept the regulations laid down in the Annex
hereto regarding the nationality of the inhabitants or natives of the said

78

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

territories, not to claim at any time or in any place whatsoever as German
nationals those who shall have been declared on any ground to be French,
to receive all others in her territory, and to conform, as regards the property
of German nationals in the territories indicated in Article 51, with the provisions of Article 297 and the Annex to Section IV of Part X (Economic
Clauses) of the present Treaty.
Those German nationals who without acquiring French nationality shall
receive permission from the French Government to reside in the said territories shall not be subjected to the provisions of the said Article.
ARTICLE

54

Those persons who have regained French nationality in virtue of paragraph 1 of the Annex hereto will be held to be Alsace-Lorrainers for the
purposes of the present Section.
The persons referred to in paragraph 2 of the said Annex will from the
day on which they have claimed French nationality be held to be AlsaceLorrainers with retroactive effect as from November 11, 1918. For those
whose application is rejected, the privilege will terminate at the date of the
refusal.
Such juridical persons will also have the status of Alsace-Lorrainers as
shall have been recognised as possessing this quality, whether by the French
administrative authorities or by a judicial decision.
ARTICLE

55

The territories referred to in Article 51 shall return to France free and quit
of all public debts under the conditions laid down in Article 255 of Part IX
(Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

56

In conformity with the provisions of Article 256 of Part IX (Financial
Clauses) of the present Treaty, France shall enter into possession of all
property and estate, within the territories referred to in Article 51, which
belong to the German Empire or German States, without any payment or
credit on this account to any of the States ceding the territories.
This provision applies to all movable or immovable property of public or
private domain together with all rights whatsoever belonging to the German
Empire or German States or to their administrative areas.
Crown property and the property of the former Emperor or other German
sovereigns shall be assimilated to property of the public domain.
ARTICLE

57

Germany shall not take any action, either by means of stamping or by any
other legal or administrative measures not applying equally to the rest of her

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

79

territory, which may be to the detriment of the legal value or redeemability
of German monetary instruments or monies which, at the date of the signature of the present Treaty, are legally current, and at that date are in the
possession of the French Government.
ARTICLE

58

A special Convention will determine the conditions for repayment in
marks of the exceptional war expenditure advanced during the course of
the war by Alsace-Lorraine or by the public bodies in Alsace-Lorraine on
account of the Empire in accordance with German law, such as payment to
the families of persons mobilised, requisitions, billeting of troops, and assistance to persons who have been evacuated.
In fixing the amount of these sums Germany shall be credited with that
portion which Alsace-Lorraine would have contributed to the Empire to
meet the expenses resulting from these payments, this contribution being
calculated according to the proportion of the Imperial revenues derived from
Alsace-Lorraine in 1913.
ARTICLE 59
The French Government will collect for its own account the Imperial taxes,
duties and dues of every kind leviable in the territories referred to in Article
51 and not collected at the time of the Armistice of November 11, 1918.
ARTICLE

60

The German Government shall without delay restore to Alsace-Lorrainers
(individuals, juridical persons and public institutions) all property, rights
and interests belonging to them on November 11, 1918, in so far as these
are situated in German territory.
ARTICLE

61

The German Government undertakes to continue and complete without
delay the execution of the financial clauses regarding Alsace-Lorraine contained in the Armistice Conventions.
ARTICLE

62

The German Government undertakes to bear the expense of all civil and
military pensions which had been earned in Alsace-Lorraine on date of November 11, 1918, and the maintenance of which was a charge on the budget
of the German Empire.
The German Government shall furnish each year the funds necessary for
the payment in francs, at the average rate of exchange for that year, of the
sums in marks to which persons resident in Alsace-Lorraine would have been
entitled if Alsace-Lorraine had remained under German jurisdiction.

80

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

63

For the purposes of the obligation assumed by Germany in Part VIII
(Reparation) of the present Treaty to give compensation for damages caused
to the civil populations of the Allied and Associated countries in the form of
fines, the inhabitants of the territories referred to in Article 51 shall be assimilated to the above-mentioned populations. .
ARTICLE

64

The regulations concerning the control of the Rhine and of the Moselle
are laid down in Part XII (Ports, Waterways and Railways) of the present
Treaty.
ARTICLE 65
Within a period of three weeks after the coming into force of the present
Treaty, the port of Strasburg and the port of Kehl shall be constituted, for
a period of seven years, a single unit from the point of view of exploitation.
The administration of this single unit will be carried on by a manager
named by the Central Rhine Commission, which shall also have power to
remove him.
This manager shall be of French nationality.
He will reside in Strasburg and will be subject to the supervision of the
Central Rhine Commission.
There will be established in the two ports free zones in conformity with
Part XII (Ports, Waterways and Railways) of the present Treaty.
A special Convention between France and Germany, which shall be submitted to the approval of the Central Rhine Commission, will fix the details
of this organisation, particularly as regards finance.
It is understood that for the purpose of the present Article the port of Kehl
includes the whole of the area necessary for the movements of the port and
the trains which serve it, including the harbour, quays and railroads, platforms, cranes, sheds and warehouses, silos, elevators and hydro-electric plants,
which make up the equipment of the port.
The German Government undertakes to carry out all measures which
shall be required of it in order to assure that all the making-up and switching
of trains arriving at or departing from Kehl, whether for the right bank or
the left bank of the Rhine, shall be carried on in the best conditions possible.
All property rights shall be safeguarded. In particular the administration
of the ports shall not prejudice any property rights of the French or Baden
railroads.
Equality of treatment as respects traffic shall be assured in both ports to
the nationals, vessels and goods of every country.
In case at the end of the sixth year France shall consider that the progress
made in the improvement of the port of Strasburg still requires a prolonga-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

81

tion of this temporary regime, she may ask for such prolongation from the
Central Rhine Commission, which may grant an extension for a period not
exceeding three years.
Throughout the whole period of any such extension the free zones above
provided for shall be maintained.
Pending appointment of the first manager by the Central Rhine Commission a provisional manager who shall be of French nationality may be appointed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers subject to the foregoing
provisions.
For all purposes of the present Article the Central Rhine Commission
will decide by a majority of votes.
ARTICLE

66

The railway and other bridges across the Rhine now existing within the
limits of Alsace-Lorraine shall, as to all their parts and their whole length,
be the property of the French State, which shall ensure their upkeep.
ARTICLE

67

The frontier railway stations shall be established by a subsequent agreeEmpire over all the railways which were administered by the Imperial railway administration and which are actually working or under construction.
The same shall apply to the rights of the Empire with regard to railway
and tramway concessions within the territories referred to in Article 51.
This substitution shall not entail any payment on the part of the French
State.
The frontier railway stations shall be estab!i.shed by a subsequent agreement, it being stipulated in advance that on the Rhine frontier they shall
be situated on the right bank.
ARTICLE 68
In accordance with the provisions of Article 268 of Chapter I of Section I
of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty, for a period of five
years from the coming into force of the present Treaty, natural or manufactured products originating in and coming from the territories referred to in
Article 51 shall, on importation into German customs territory, be exempt
from all customs duty.
The French Government may fix each year, by decree communicated to
the German Government, the nature and amount of the products which shall
enjoy this exemption.
The amount of each product which may be thus sent annually into Germany shall not exceed the average of the amounts sent annually in the years

1911-1913.
Further, during the period of five years above mentioned, the German Government shall allow the free export from Germany and the free reimporta-

82

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

tion into Germany, exempt from all customs duties and other charges (including internal charges), of yarns, tissues, and other textile materials or textile products of any kind and in any condition, sent from Germany into the
territories referred to in Article 51, to be subjected there to any finishing
process, such as bleaching, dyeing, printing, mercerization, gassing, twisting
or dressing.
ARTICLE 69
During a period of ten years from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, central electric supply works situated in German territory and·formerly furnishing electric power to the territories referred to in Article 51 or to
any establishment the working of which passes permanently or temporarily
from Germany to France, shall be required to continue such supply up to the
amount of consumption corresponding to the undertakings and contracts
current on November 11,1918.
Such supply shall be furnished according to the contracts in force and at a
rate which shall not be higher than that paid to the said works by German
nationals.
ARTICLE

70

It is understood that the French Government preserves its right to prohibit
in the future in the territories referred to in Article 51 all new German
participation:
( 1) In the management or exploitation of the public domain and of public
services, such as railways, navigable waterways, water works, gas works,
electric power, etc. ;
(2) In the ownership of mines and quarries of every kind and in enterprises
connected therewith;
(3) In metallurgical establishments, even though their working may not
be connected with that of any mine.
ARTICLE

71

As regards the territories referred to in Article 51, Germany renounces on
behalf of herself and her nationals as from November 11, 1918, all rights
under the law of May 25, 1910, regarding the trade in potash salts, and
generally under any stipulations for the intervention of German organisations in the working of the potash mines. Similarly, she renounces on behalf
of herself and her nationals all rights under any agreements, stipulations or
laws which may exist to her benefit with regard to other products of the aforesaid territories.
ARTICLE

72

The settlement of the questions relating to debts contracted before
November 11, 1918, between the German Empire and the German States
or their nationals residing in Germany on the one part and Alsace-Lorrainers

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

83

residing in Alsace-Lorraine on the other part shall be effected in accordance
with the provisions of Section III of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present
Treaty, the expression "before the war" therein being replaced by the expression "before November 11, 1918". The rate of exchange applicable in the
case of such settlement shall be the average rate quoted on the Geneva Exchange during the month preceding November 11, 1918.
There may be established in the territories referred to in Article 51, for the
settlement of the aforesaid debts under the conditions laid down in Section
III of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty, a special clearing
office, it being understood that this office shall be regarded as a "central
office" under the provisions of paragraph 1 of the Annex to the said Section.
ARTICLE

73

The private property, rights and interests of Alsace-Lorrainers in Germany
will be regulated by the stipulations of Section IV of Part X (Economic
Clauses) of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

74

The French Government reserves the right to retain and liquidate all the
property, rights and interests which German nationals or societies controlled
by Germany possessed in the territories referred to in Article 51 on November
11, 1918, subject to the conditions laid down in the last paragraph of Article
53 above.
Germany will directly compensate her nationals who may have been dispossessed by the aforesaid liquidations.
.
The product of these liquidations shall be applied in accordance with the
stipulations of Sections III and IV of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treatv.
ARTICLE

75

Notwithstanding the stipulations of Section V of Part X (Economic
Clauses) of the present Treaty, all contracts made before the date of the
promulgation in Alsace-Lorraine of the French decree of November 30,1918,
between Alsace-Lorrainers (whether individuals or juridical persons) or
others resident in Alsace-Lorraine on the one part and the German Empire
or German States and their nationals resident in Germany on the other part,
the execution of which has been suspended by the Armistice or by subsequent
French legislation, shall be maintained.
Nevertheless, any contract of which the French Government shall notify.
the cancellation to Germany in the general interest within a period of six
months from the date of the.coming into force of the present Treaty, shall be
annulled except in respect of any debt or other pecuniary obligation arising
out of any act done or money paid thereunder before November 11, 191.!3. If
this dissolution would cause one of the parties substantial prejudice, equitable

84

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

compensation, calculated solely on the capital employed without taking account of loss of profits, shall be accorded to the prejudiced party.
With regard to prescriptions, limitations and forfeitures in Alsace-Lorraine, the provisions of Articles 300 and 301 of Section V of Part X (Economic Clauses) shall be applied with the substitution for the expression "outbreak of war" of the expression "November 11, 1918", and for the expression
"duration of the war" of the expression "period from November 11, 1918, to
the date of the coming into force of the present Treaty".
ARTICLE

76

Questions concerning rights in industrial, literary or artistic property of
Alsace-Lorrainers shall be regulated in accordance with the general stipulations of Section VII of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty, it
being understood that Alsace-Lorrainers holding rights of this nature under
German legislation will preserve full and entire enjoyment of those rights on
German territory.
ARTICLE

77

The German Government undertakes to pay over to the French Government such proportion of all reserves accumulated by the Empire or by public
or private bodies dependent upon it, for the purposes of disability and old age
insurance, as would fall to the disability and old age insurance fund at
Strasburg.
The same shall apply in respect of the capital and reserves accumulated in
Germany falling legitimately to other social insurance funds, to miners' superannuation funds, to the fund of the railways of Alsace-Lorraine, to other superannuation organisations established for the benefit of the personnel of public
administrations and institutions operating in Alsace-Lorraine, and also in respect of the capital and reserves due by the insurance fund of private employees at Berlin, by reason of engagements entered into for the benefit of
insured persons of that category resident in Alsace-Lorraine.
A special Convention shall determine the conditions and procedure of these
transfers.
ARTICLE

78

With regard to the execution of judgments, appeals and prosecutions, the
following rules shall be applied:
( 1) All civil and commercial judgments which shall have been given since
August 3,1914, by the Courts of Alsace-Lorraine between Alsace-Lorrainers,
or between Alsace-Lorrainers and foreigners, or between foreigners, and
which shall not have been appealed from before November 11,1918, shall be
regarded as final and susceptible of immediate execution without further
formality.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

85

When the judgment has been given between Alsace-Lorrainers and Germans or between Alsace-Lorrainers and subjects of the allies of Germany, it
shall only be capable of execution after the issue of an exequatur by the corresponding new tribunal in the restored territory referred to in Article 51.
(2) All judgments given by German Courts since August 3,1914, against
Alsace-Lorrainers for political crimes or misdemeanors shall be regarded as
null and void.
(3) All sentences passed since November 11,1918, by the Court of the
Empire at Leipzig on appeals against the decisions of the Courts of AlsaceLorraine shall be regarded as null and void and shall be so pronounced. The
papers in regard to the cases in which such sentences have been given shall be
returned to the Courts of Alsace-Lorraine concerned.
All appeals to the Court of the Empire against decisions of the Courts of
Alsace-Lorraine shall be suspended. The papers shall be returned under the
aforesaid conditions for transfer without delay to the French Cour de Cassation, which shall be competent to decide them.
(4) All prosecutions in Alsace-Lorraine for offences committed during the
period between November 11, 1918, and the coming into force of the present
Treaty will be conducted under German law except in so far as this has been
modified by decrees duly published on the spot by the French authorities.
(5) All other questions as to competence, procedure or administration of
justice shall be determined by a special Convention between France and
Germany.
ARTICLE 79
The stipulations as to nationality contained in the Annex hereto shall be
considered as of equal force with the provisions of the present Section.
All other questions concerning Alsace-Lorraine which are not regulated
by the present Section and the Annex thereto or by the general provisions of
the present Treaty will form the subject of further conventions between
France and Germany.

ANNEX
1
As from November 11, 1918, the following persons are ipso facto reinstated in French nationality:
( 1) Persons who lost French nationality by the application of the FrancoGerman Treaty of May 10, 1871, and who have not since that date 'acquired
any nationality other than German;
(2) The legitimate or natural descendants of the persons referred to in
the immediately preceding paragraph, with the exception of those whose
ascendants in the paternal line include a German who migrated into AlsaceLorraine after July 15, 1870;

86

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

(3) All persons born in Alsace-Lorraine of unknown parents, or whose
nationality is unknown.

2
Within the period of one year from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, persons included in any of the following categories may claim French
nationality:
( 1) All persons not restored to French nationality under paragraph 1
above, whose ascendants include a Frenchman or Frenchwoman who lost
French nationality under the conditions referred to in the said paragraph;
(2) All foreigners, not nationals of a German State, who acquired the
status of a citizen of Alsace-Lorraine before August 3, 1914;
(3) All Germans domiciled in Alsace-Lorraine, if they have been so
domiciled since a date previous to July 15, 1870, or if one of their ascendants
was at that date domiciled in Alsace-Lorraine;
(4) All Germans born or domiciled in Alsace-Lorraine who have served
in the Allied or Associated armies during the present war, and their
descendants;
(5) All persons born in Alsace-Lorraine before May 10,1871, of foreign
parents, and the descendants of such persons;
(6) The husband or wife of any person whose French nationality may
have been restored under paragraph 1, or who may have claimed and obtained French nationality in accordance with the preceding provisions.
The legal representative of a minor may exercise, on behalf of that minor,
the right to claim French nationality; and if that right has not been exercised,
the minor may claim French nationality within the year following his
majority.
Except in the cases provided for in No. (6) of the present paragraph,
the French authorities reserve to themselves the right, in individual cases, to
reject the claim to French nationality.

3
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2, Germans born or domiciled in
Alsace-Lorraine shall not acquire French nationality by reason of the restoration of Alsace-Lorraine to France, even though they may have the status
of citizens of Alsace-Lorraine.
They may acquire French nationality only by naturalisation, on condition
of having been domiciled in Alsace-Lorraine from a date previous to August 3, 1914, and of submitting proof of unbroken residence within the
restored territory for a period of three years from November 11, 1918.
France will be solely responsible for their diplomatic and consular protection from the date of their application for French naturalisation.
The French Government shall determine the procedure by which reinstatement in French nationality as of right shall be effected, and the con-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

87

ditions under which decisions shall be given upon claims to such nationality
and applications for naturalisation, as provided by the present Annex.
SECTION VI

Austria
ARTICLE

80

Germany acknowledges and will respect strictly the independence of
Austria, within the frontiers which may be fixed in a Treaty between that
State and the Principal Allied and Associated Powers; she agrees that this
independence shall be inalienable, except with the consent of the Council of
the League of Nations.
SECTION VII

Czecho-Slovak State
ARTICLE

81

Germany, in conformity with the action already taken by the Allied and
Associated Powers, recognizes the complete independence of the CzechoSlovak State which will include the autonomous territory of the Ruthenians
to the south of the Carpathians. Germany hereby recognizes the frontiers of
this State as determined by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and
the other interested States.
ARTICLE 82
The old frontier as it existed on August 3,1914, between Austria-Hungary
and the German Empire will constitute the frontier between Germany and
the Czecho-Slovak State.
ARTICLE 83
Germany renounces in favour of the Czecho-Slovak State all rights and
title over the portion of Silesian territory defined as follows:
starting from a point about 2 kilometres south-east of Katscher, on the
boundary between the K reise of Leobschiitz and Ratibor:
the boundary between the two K reise ;
then, the former boundary between Germany and Austria-Hungary up to
a point on the Oder immediately to the south of the Ratibor-Oderberg
railway;
thence, towards the north-west and up to a point about 2 kilometres to
the south-east of Katscher:
a line to be fixed on the spot passing to the west of Kranowitz.
A Commission composed of seven members, five nominated by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, one by Poland and one by the CzechoSlovak State, will be appointed fifteen days after the coming into force of the

88

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

present Treaty to trace on the spot the frontier line between Poland and the
Czecho-Slovak State.
The decisions of this Commission will be taken by a majority and shall be
binding on the parties concerned.
Germany hereby agrees to renounce in favour of the Czecho-Slovak State
all rights and title over the part of the Kreis of Leobschiitz comprised within
the following boundaries in case after the determination of the frontier between Germany and Poland the said part of that Kreis should become isolated
from Germany:
from the south-eastern extremity of the salient of the former Austrian
frontier at about 5 kilometres to the west of Leobschutz southwards and up
to the point of junction with the boundary between the Kreise of Leobschutz
and Ratibor:
the former frontier between Germany and Austria-Hungary;
then, northwards, the administrative boundary between the Kreise of Leobschutz and Ratibor up to a point situated about 2 kilometres to the south-east
of Katscher;
thence, north-westwards and up to the starting-point of this definition:
a line to be fixed on the spot passing to the east of Katscher.
ARTICLE

84

German nationals habitually resident in any of the territories recognized as
forming part of the Czecho-Slovak State will obtain Czecho-Slovak nationality ipso facto and lose their German nationality.
ARTICLE

85

Within a period of two years from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, German nationals over eighteen years of age habitually resident in
any of the territories recognized as forming part of the Czecho-Slovak State
will be entitled to opt for German nationality. Czecho-Slovaks who are German nationals and are habitually resident in Germany will have a similar right
to opt for Czecho-Slovak nationality.
Option by a husband will cover his wife and option by parents will cover
their children under eighteen years of age.
Persons who have exercised the above right to opt must within the succeeding twelve months transfer their place of residence to the State for which they
have opted.
They will be entitled to retain their landed property in the territory of the
other State where they had their place of residence before exercising the right
to opt. They may carry with them their moveable property of every description. No export or import duties may be imposed upon them in connection
with the removal of such property.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

89

Within the same period Czecho-Slovaks who are German nationals and are
in a foreign country will be entitled, in the absence of any provisions to the
contrary in the foreign law, and if they have not acquired the foreign nationality, to obtain Czecho-Slovak nationality and lose their Germa.n nationality by
complying with the requirements laid down by the Czecho-Slovak State.
ARTICLE

86

The Czecho-Slovak State accepts and agrees to embody in a Treaty with
the Principal Allied and Associated Powers such provisions as may be deemed
necessary by the said Powers to protect the interests of inhabitants of that
State who differ from the majority of the population in race, language or
religion.
The Czecho-Slovak State further accepts and agrees to embody in a Treaty
with the said Powers such provisions as they may deem necessary to protect
freedom of transit and equitable treatment of the commerce of other nations.
The proportion and nature of the financial obligations of Germany and
Prussia which the Czecho-Slovak State will have to assume on account of the
Silesian territory placed under its sovereignty will be determined in accordance with Article 254 of Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty.
Subsequent agreements will decide all questions not decided by the present
Treaty which may arise in consequence of the cession of the said territory.
SECTION VIII

Poland
ARTICLE

87

Germany, in conformity with the action already taken by the Allied and
Associated Po~ers, recognizes the complete independence of Poland, and
renounces in her favour all rights and title over the territory bounded by the
Baltic Sea, the eastern frontier of Germany as laid down in Article 27 of
Part II (Boundaries of Germany) of the present Treaty up to a point situated
about 2 kilometres to the east of Lorzendorf, then a line to the ·acute angle
which the northern boundary of Upper Silesia makes about 3 kilometres
north-west of Simmenau, then the boundary of Upper Silesia to its meeting
point with the old frontier between Germany and Russia, then this frontier
to the point where it crosses the course of the Niemen, and then the northern
frontier of East Prussia as laid down in Article 28 of Part II aforesaid.
The provisions of this Article do not, however, apply to the territories of
East Prussia and the Free City of Danzig, as defined in Article 28 of Part II
(Boundaries of Germany) and in Article 100 of Section XI (Danzig) of this
Part.
The boundaries of Poland not laid down in the present Treaty will be
subsequently determined by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.

90

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

A CQn:unission consisting of seven members, five of whom shall be nominated by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, one by Germany and
one by Poland, shall be constituted fifteen days after the coming into force
of the present Treaty to delimit on the spot the frontier line between Poland
and Germany.
The decisions of the Commission will be taken by a majority of votes and
shall be binding upon the parties concerned.
ARTICLE

88

In the portion of Upper Silesia included within the boundaries described
below, the inhabitants will be called upon to indicate by a vote whether they
wish to be attached to Germany or to Poland:
starting from the northern point of the salient of the old province of
Austrian Silesia situated about 8 kilometers east of Neustadt, the former
frontier between Germany and Austria to its junction with the boundary
between the Kreise of Leobschlltz and Ratibor;
thence in a northerly direction to a point about 2 kilometers southeast of
Katscher:
the boundary between the K reise of Leobschiitz and Ratibor;
thence in a south-easterly direction to a point on the course of the Oder
immediately south of the Ratibor-Oderberg railway:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing south of Kranowitz;
thence the old boundary between Germany and Austria, then the old
boundary between Germany and Russia to its junction with the administrative boundary between Posnania and Upper Silesia;
thence this administrative boundary to its junction with the administrative
,boundary between Upper and Middle Silesia;
thence westwards to the point where the administrative boundary turns in
an acute angle to the south-east about 3 kilometres north-west of Simmenau:
the boundary between Upper and Middle Silesia;
then in a westerly direction to a point to be fixed on the ground about 2
kilometres east of Lorzendorf:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing north of Klein Hennersdorf:
thence southwards to the point where the boundary between Upper and
Middle Silesia cuts the Stadtel-Karlsruhe road:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing west of Hennersdorf, Polkowitz,
Noldau, Steinersdorf and Dam~er, and east of Strehlitz, Nassadel, Eckersdorf, Schwirz and Stlidtel; '.
thence the boundary between Upper and Middle Silesia to its junction
with the eastern boundary of the Kreis of Falkenberg;
then the eastern boundary of the Kreis of Falkenberg to the point of the
.
salient which·~3kilometrese,astof Pus~hine;

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

91.

thence to the northern point of the salient of the old province of Austrian
Silesia situated about 8 kilometres east of Neustadt:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing east of Ziilz.
The regime under which this plebiscite will be taken and given effect to
is laid down in the Annex hereto.
'
The Polish and German Governments hereby'respectively bind themselves
to conduct no prosecutions on any part of their territory and to take no exceptional proceedings for any political action performed in Upper Silesia during
the period of the regime laid down in the Annex hereto and up to the settlement of the final status of the country.
Germany hereby renounces' in favour of Poland all rights and title over
the portion of Upper Silesia lying beyond the frontier line fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers as the result of the plebiscite.
ANNEX

1
Within fifteen days from the coming into force of the present Treaty the
German troops and such officials as may be designated by the Commission
set up under the provisions of paragraph 2 shall evacuate the plebiscite area.
Up to the moment of the completion of the evacuation they shall refrain
from any form of requisitioning in money or in kind and from all acts likely
to prejudice the material interests of the country.
Within the same period the Workmen's and Soldiers' Councils which have
been constituted in this area shall be dissolved. Members of such Councils
whq are natives of another region and are exercising 'their functions at the
date of the coming into force of the present Treaty, or who have gone out of
office since March 1, 1919, shall be evacuated.
, All military and semi-military unions formed in the said area by inhabitants
of the district shall be immediately disbanded. All memberS of such military
organizations who are not domiciled in the said area shall be required to
leave it.

2
The plebiscite area shall be imrn:eciiateiy' placed under the authority of an
International Commission of four members to be designated by the following
Powers; the United States of America, France, the British Empire and Italy.
It shall be occupied by troops belonging to the Allied and Associated Powers,
and the German Government undertakes to give facilities for the transference
of these troops to Upper Silesia.

3
The Commission shall enjoy all the powers exercised by the German or
the Prussian Government, except those of legislation taxation. It shall also
be substituted for the Government ortheprbvince ancl'the Regierungsbezirk.

or

92

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

It shall be within the competence of the Commission to interpret the powers
hereby conferred upon it and to determine to what extent it shall exercise
them, and to what extent they shall be left in the hands of the existing
authorities.
Changes in the existing laws and the existing taxation shall only be brought
into force with the consent of the Commission.
The Commission will maintain order with the help of the troops which will
be at its disposal, and, to the extent which it may deem necessary, by means
of gendarmerie recruited among the inhabitants of the country.
The Commission shall provide immediately for the replacement of the
evacuated German officials and, if occasion arises, shall itself order the evacuation of such authorities and proceed to the replacement of such local authorities as may be required.
It shall take all steps which it thinks proper to ensure the freedom, fairness
and secrecy of the vote. In particular, it shall have the right to order the expulsion of any person who may in any way have attempted to distort the result of the plebiscite by methods of corruption or intimidation.
The Commission shall have full power to settle all questions arising from
the execution of the present clauses. It shall be assisted by technical advisers
chosen by it from among the local population.
The decisions of the Commission shall be taken by a majority vote.
4

The vote shall take place at such date as may be determined by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, but not sooner than six months or IGtter
than eighteen months after the establishment of the Commission in the area.
The right to vote shall be given to all persons without distinction of sex
who:

(a) Have completed their twentieth year on the 1st January of the year
in which the plebiscite takes plac<;;
( b) Were born in the plebiscite area or have been domiciled there since
a date to be determined by the Commission, which shall not be subsequent
to January 1, 1919, or who have been expelled by the German authorities
and have not retained their domicile there.
Persons convicted of political offences shall be enabled to exercise their
right of voting.
Every person will vote in the commune where he is domiciled or in which
he was born, if he has not retained his domicile in the area.
The result of the vote will be determined by communes according to the
majority of votes in each commune.

5
On the conclusion of the voting, the number of votes cast in each commune
will be communicated by the Commission to the Principal Allied and Associ-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

93

ated Powers, with a full report as to the taking of the vote and a recommendation as to the line which ought to be adopted as the frontier of Germany
in Upper Silesia. In this recommendation regard will be paid to the wishes of
the inhabitants as shown by the vote, and to the geographical and economic
conditions of the locality.
6
As soon as the frontier has been fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, the German authorities will be notified by the International
Commission that they are free to take over the administration of the territory
which it is recognised should be German; the said authorities must proceed
to do so within one month of such notification and in the manner prescribed
by the Commission.
Within the same period and in the manner prescribed by the Commission,
the Polish Government must proceed to take over the administration of the
territory which it is recognised should be Polish.
When the administration of the territory has been provided for by the German and Polish authorities respectively, the powers of the Commission will
terminate.
The cost of the army of occupation and expenditure by the Commission,
whether in discharge of its own functions or in the administration of the
territory, will be a charge on the area.
ARTICLE

89

Poland undertakes to accord freedom of transit to persons, goods, vessels,
carriages, wagons and mails in transit between East Prussia and the rest of
Germany over Polish territory, including territorial waters, and to treat them.
at least as favourably as the persons, goods, vessels, carriages, wagons and
mails respectively of Polish or of any other more favoured nationality, origin,
importation, starting point, or ownership as regards facilities, restrictions and
all other matters.
Goods in transit shall be exempt from all customs or other similar duties.
Freedom of transit will extend to telegraphic and telephonic services under
the conditions laid down by the conventions referred to in Article 98.

90
Poland undertakes to permit for a period of fifteen years the exportation to
Germany of the products of the mines in any part of Upper Silesia transferred
to Poland in accordance with the present Treaty.
Such products shall be free from all export duties or other charges or restrictions on exportation.
Poland agrees to take such steps as may be necessary to secure that any such
products shall be available for sale to purchasers in Germany on terms as favourable as are applicable to like products sold under similar conditions to
purchasers in Poland or in any other country.
ARTICLE

94

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

91

German nationals habitually resident in territories recognised as fonning
part of Poland will acquire Polish nationality ipso facto and will lose their
Gennan nationality.
German nationals, however, or their descendants who became resident in
these territories after January 1, 1908, will not acquire Polish nationality
without a special authorisation from the Polish State.
Within a period of two years after the coming into force of the present
Treaty, Gennan nationals over 18 years of age habitually resident in any of
the territories recognised as fonning part of Poland will be entitled to opt for
German nationality.
Poles who are German nationals over 18 years of age and habitually resident in Germany will have a similar right to opt for Polish nationality.
Option by a husband will cover his wife and option by parents will cover
their children under 18 years of age.
.
Persons who have exercised the above right to opt may within the succeeding twelve months transfer their place of residence to the State for which
they have opted.
They wm be entitled to retain their immovable property in the territory
of the other State where they had their place of residence before exercising
the right to opt.
They may carry with them their movable property of every description. No
export or import duties or charges may be imposed upon them in connection
with the removal of such property.
Within the same period Poles who are German nationals and are in a
foreign country wm be entitled, in the absence of any provisions to the contrary in the foreign law, and if they have not acquired the foreign nationality,
to obtain Polish nationality and to lose their Gennan nationality by complying with the requirements laid down by the Polish State.
In the portion of Upper Silesia submitted to a plebiscite the provisions of
this Article shall only come into force as from the definitive attribution of the
territory.
ARTICLE 92
The proportion and the nature of the financial liabilities of Germany and
Prussia which are to be borne by Poland will be detennined in accordance
with Article 254 of Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty.
There shall be excluded from the share of such financial liabilities assumed
by Poland that portion of the debt which, according to the finding of the
Reparation Commission referred to in the above-mentioned Article, arises
from measures adopted by the Gennan and Prussian Governments with a
view to Gennan colonisation in Poland.
In fixing under Article 256 of the present Treaty the value of the property
and possessions belonging to the German Empire and to the Gennan States

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

95

which pass to Poland with the territory transferred above, the Reparation
Commission shall exclude from the valuation buildings, forests and other
State property which belonged to the former Kingdom of Poland; Poland
shall acquire these properties free of all costs and charges.
In all the German territory transferred in accordance with the present
Treaty and recognised as forming definitively part of Poland, the property,
rights and interests of German nationals shall not be liquidated under Article
297 by the Polish Government except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) The proceeds of the liquidation shall be paid direct to the owner;
(2) If on his application the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal provided for by
Section VI of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty, or an
arbitrator appointed by that Tribunal, is satisfied that the conditions of the
sale or measures taken by the Polish Government outside its generallegislation were unfairly prejudicial to the price obtained, they shall have discretion
to award to the owner equitable compensation to be paid by the Polish
Government.
Further agreements will regulate all questions arising out of the cession
of the above territory which are not regulated by the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

93

Poland accepts and agrees to embody in a Treaty with the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers such provisions as may be deemed necessary by the
said Powers to protect the interests of inhabitants of Poland who differ from
the majority of the population in race, language or religion.
Poland further accepts and agrees to embody in a Treaty with the said
Powers such provisions as they may deem necessary to protect freedom of
transit and equitable treatment of the commerce of other nations.
SECTION IX

East Prussia
ARTICLE

94

In the area between the southern frontier of East Prussia, as described in
Article 28 of Part II (Boundaries of Germany) of the present Treaty, and
the line described below, the inhabitants will be called upon to indicate by
a vote the State to which they wish to belong:
The western and northern boundary of Regierungsbezirk Allenstein to its
junction with the boundary between the Kreise of Oletsko and Angerburg;
thence, the northern boundary of the Kreis of Oletsko to its junction with
the old frontier o'f East Prussia.

96

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

95

The German troops and authorities will be withdrawn from the area
defined above within a period not exceeding fifteen days after the coming
into force of the present Treaty. Until the evacuation is completed they will
abstain from all requisitions in money or in kind and from all measures injurious to the economic interests of the country.
. On the expiration of the above-mentioned period the said area will be
placed under the authority of an International Commission of five members
appointed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers. This Commission
will have general powers of administration and, in particular, will be
charged with the duty of arranging for the vote and of taking such measures
as it may deem necessary to ensure its freedom, fairness and secrecy. The
Commission will have all necessary authority to decide any questions to which
the execution of these provisions may give rise. The Commission will make
such arrangements as may be necessary for assistance in the exercise of its
functions by officials chosen by itself from the local population. Its decisions
will be taken by a majority.
Every person, irrespective of sex, will be entitled to vote who:
(a) Is 20 years of age at the date of the coming into force of the present
Treaty, and
( b ) Was born within the area where the vote will take place or has been
habitually resident there from a date to be fixed by the Commission.

Every person will vote in the commune where he is habitually resident or,
if not habitually resident in the area, in the commune where he was born.
The result of the vote will be determined by communes (Gemeinde) according to the majority of the votes in each commune.
On the conclusion of the voting the number of votes cast in each commune
will be communicated by the Commission to the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, with a full report as to the taking of the vote and a recommendation as to the line which ought to be adopted as the boundary of East
Prussia in this region. In this recommendation regard will be paid to the
wishes of the inhabitants as shown by the vote and to the geographical and
economic conditions of the locality. The Principal Allied and Associated
Powers will then fix the frontier between East Prussia and Poland in this
region.
If the line fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers is such as
to exclude from East Prussia any part of the territory defined in Article 94,
the renunciation of its rights by Germany in favour of Poland, as provided
in Article 87 above, will extend to the territories so excluded.
As soon as the line has been fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers, the authorities administering East Prussia will be notified by the

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

97

International Commission that they are free to take over the administration
of the territory to the north of the line so fixed, which they shall proceed to do
within one month 'of such notification and in the manner prescribed by the
Commission. Within the same period and as prescribed by the Commission,
the Polish Government must proceed to take over the administration of the
territory to the south of the line. When the administration of the territory by
the East Prussian and Polish authorities respectively has been provided for,
the powers of the Commission will terminate.
Expenditure by the Commission, whether in the discharge of its own functions or in the administration of the territory, will be borne by the local revenues. East Prussia will be required to bear such proportion of any deficit as
may be fixed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

96

In the area comprising the Kreise of Stuhm and Rosenberg and the portion
of the Kreis of Marienburg which is situated east of the Nogat and that of
Marienwerder east of the Vistula, the inhabitants will be called upon to indicate by a vote, to be taken in each commune (Gemeinde), whether they
desire the various communes situated in this territory to belong to Poland or
to East Prussia.
.
ARTICLE 97
The German troops and authorities will be withdrawn from the area defined in Article 96 within a period not exceeding fifteen days after the coming
into force of the present Treaty. Until the evacuation is completed they will
abstain from all requisitions in money or in kind and from all measures injurious to the economic interests of the COlllltry.
On the expiration of the above-mentioned period, the said area will be
placed under the authority of an International Commission of five members
appointed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers. This Commission,
supported if occasion arises by the necessary forces, will have general powers
of administration and in particular will be charged with the duty of arranging for the vote and of taking such measures as it may deem necessary to ensure its freedom, fairness and secrecy. The Commission will conform as far
as possible to the provisions of the present Treaty relating to the plebiscite in
the Allenstein area; its decisions will be taken by a majority.
Expenditure by the Commission, whether in the discharge of its own functions or in the administration of the territory, will be borne by the local
revenues.
On the conclusion of the voting the number of votes cast in each commune will be communicated by the Commission to the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers with a full report as to the taking of the vote and a recommendation as to the line which ought to be adopted as the boundary of East

98

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Prussia in this region. In this recommendation regard will be paid to the
wishes of the inhabitants as shown by the vote and to the geographical and
economic conditions of the locality. The Principal Allied and Associated
Powers will then fix the frontier between East Prussia and Poland in this region, leaving in any case to Poland for the whole of the section bordering on
the Vistula full and complete control of the river including the east bank as
far east of the river as may be necessary for its regulation and improvement.
Germany agrees that in any portion of the said territory which remains German, no fortifications shall at any time be erected.
The Principal Allied and Associated Powers will at the same time draw up
regulations for assuring to the population of East Prussia to the fullest extent
and under equitable conditions access to the Vistula and the use of it for
themselves, their commerce and their boats.
The determination of the frontier and the foregoing regulations shall be
binding upon all the parties concerned.
When the administration of the territory has been taken over by the East
Prussian and Polish authorities respectively, the powers of the Commission
will terminate.
ARTICLE 98
Germany and Poland undertake, within one year of the coming into force
of this Treaty, to enter into conventions of which the terms, in case of difference, shall be settled by the Council of the League of Nations, with the object
of securing, on the one hand to Germany full and adequate railroad, telegraphic and telephonic facilities for communication between the rest of Germany and East Prussia over the intervening Polish territory, and on the other
hand to Poland full and adequate railroad, telegraphic and telephonic facilities for communication between Poland and the Free City of Danzig over
any Germany territory that may, on the right bank of the Vistula, intenrene,'
between Poland and the Free City of Danzig.
SECTION X

Memel
ARTICLE

99

Germany renounces in favour of the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers all rights and title over the territories included between the Baltic,
the north eastern frontier of East Prussia as defined in Article 28 of Part II
(Boundaries of Germany) of the present Treaty and the former frontier between Germany and Russia.
Germany undertakes to accept the settlement made by the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers in regard to these territories, particularly in so far as
concerns the nationality of the inhabitants.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

99

SECTION XI

Free City of Danzig
ARTICLE

100

Germany renounces in favour of the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers all rights and title over the territory comprised within the following
limits:
from the Baltic Sea southwards to the point where the principal channels
of navigation of the Nogat and the Vistula (Weichsel) meet:
the boundary of East Prussia as described in Article 28 of Part II (Boundaries of Germany) of the present Treaty;
thence the principal channel of navigation of the Vistula downstream to
a point about 612 kilometres north of the bridge of Dirschau;
thence north-west to point 5, 112 kilometres south-east of the church of
Giittland:
a line to be fixed on the ground;
thence in a general westerly direction to the salient made by the boundary
of the Kreis of Berent 812 kilometres north-east of SchOneck:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing between MiiWbanz on the south
and Ramheltsch on the north;
thence the boundary of the Kreis of Berent westwards to the re-entrant
which it forms 6 kilometres north-north-west of Schoneck;
thence to a point on the median line of Lonkener See:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing north of Neu Fietz and Schatarpi
and south of Barenhiitte and Lonken;
thence the median line of Lonkener See to its northernmost point;
thence to the southern end of Pollenziner See:
a line to bc fixed on the ground;
thence the median line of Pollenziner See to its northernmost point;
thence in a north-easterly direction to a point about 1 kilometre south of
Koliebken church, where the Danzig-Neustadt railway crosses a stream:
a line to be fixed on the ground passing south-east of Kamehlen, Krissau,
Fidlin, Sulmin (Richthof), Mattern, Schaferei, and to the north-west of
Neuendorf, Marschau, Czapielken, Hoch- and Klein-Kelpin, Pulvermiihl,
Renneberg and the towns of Oliva and Zoppot;
thence the course of the stream mentioned above to the Baltic Sea.
The boundaries described above are drawn on a German map, scale
1/100,000, attached to the present Treaty (Map No.3) .12
12

Printed in S. Doc. 51, 66th Cong., 1st sess., between pp. 148 and 149.

100

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

101

A Commission composed of three members appointed by the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers, including a High Commissioner as President,
one member appointed by Germany and one member appointed by Poland,
shall be constituted within fifteen days of the coming into force of the present
Treaty for the purpose of delimiting on the spot the frontier of the territory
as described above, taking into account as far as possible the existing communal boundaries.
ARTICLE 102
The Principal Allied and Associated Powers undertake to establish the
town of Danzig, together with the rest of the territory described in Article
100, as a Free City. It will be placed under the protection of the League
of Nations.
ARTICLE 103
A constitution for the Free City of Danzig shall be drawn up by the duly
appointed representatives of the Free City in agreement with a High Commissioner to be appointed by the League of Nations. This constitution shall be
placed under the guarantee of the League of Nations.
The High Commissioner will also be entrusted with the duty of dealing
in the first instance with all differences arising between Poland and the Free
City of Danzig in regard to this Treaty or any arrangements or agreements
made thereunder.
The High Commissioner shall reside at Danzig.
ARTICLE

104

The Principal Allied and Associated Powers undertake to negotiate a
Treaty between the Polish Government and the Free City of Danzig, which
shall come into force at the same time as the establishment of the said Free
City, with the following objects:
(1) To effect the inclusion of the Free City of Danzig within the Polish
Customs frontiers, and to establish a free area in the port;
(2) To ensure to Poland without any restriction the free use and service
of all waterways, docks, basins, wharves and other works within the territory of the Free City necessary for Polish imports and exports;
(3) To ensure to Poland the control and administration of the Vistula
and of the whole railway system within the Free City, except such street and
other railways as serve primarily the needs of the Free City, and of postal,
telegraphic and telephonic communication between Poland and the port of
Danzig;
(4) To ensure to Poland the right to develop and improve the waterways,
docks, basins, wharves, railways and other works and means of communica-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

101

tion mentioned in this Article, as well as to lease or purchase through appropriate processes such land and other property as may be necessary for these
purposes;
(5) To provide against any discrimination within the Free City of Danzig
to the detriment of citizens of Poland and other persons of Polish origin or
speech;
(6) To provide that the Polish Government shall undertake the conduct·
of the foreign relations of the Free City of Danzig as well as the diplomatic
protection of citizens of that city when abroad.
ARTICLE

105

On the coming into force of the present Treaty German nationals ordinarily
resident in the territory described in Article 100 will ipso facto lose their
German nationality in order to become nationals of the Free City of Danzig.
ARTICLE

106

Within a period of two years from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, German nationals over 18 years of age ordinarily resident in the territory described in Article 100 will have the right to opt for German
nationality.
Option by a husband will cover his wife and option by parents will cover
their children less .than 18 years of age.
All persons·who exercise the right of option referred to above must during
the ensuing twelve. months .transfer their place of residence to Germany.
These persons will be entitled to preserve the immovable property possessed
by them in the territory of the Free City of Danzig. They may carry with
them their movable property of every description. No export or import duties
shall be imposed upon them in this connection.
ARTICLE

107

All property situated within the territory of the Free City of Danzig belonging to the German Empire or to any German State shall pass to the Principal
Allied and Associ~ted Powers for transfer to the Free City of Danzig or to the
Polish State as they may consider equitable.
ARTICLE

108·

. The proportion and nature of the financial liabilities of Germany and of
Prussia to be borne by the Free City of Danzig shall be fixed in accordance
with Article 254 of Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty.
All other questions which may arise from the cession of the territory referred
to in Article 100 shall be settled by further agreements.

102

IvruLTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
SECTION XII

Schleswig
ARTICLE

109

The frontier between Gennany and Denmark shall be fixed in confonnity
with the wishes of the population.
For this purpose, the population inhabiting the territories of the fonner
Gennan Empire situated to the north of a line, from East to West, (shown
by a brown line on the map No. 4/3 annexed to the present Treaty) :
leaving the Baltic Sea about 13 kilometres east-north-east of Flensburg,
running
south-west so as to pass south-east of: Sygum, Ringsberg, Munkbrarup,
Adelby, Tastrup, Jarplund, Oversee, and north-west of: Langballigholz,
Langballig, Bonstrup, Riillschau, Weseby, Kleinwolstrup, Gross-Solt,
thence westwards passing south of Frorup and north of Wanderup,
thence in a south-westerly direction passing south-east of Oxlund, Stieglund
and Ostenau and north-west of the villages on the Wanderup-Kollund road,
thence in a north-westerly direction passing south-west of Lawenstedt,
Joldelund, Goldelund, and north-east of Kolkerheide and Hagel to the bend
of the Soholmer Au, about 1 kilometre east of Soholm, where it meets the
southern boundary of the Kreis of Tondern,
following this boundary to the North Sea,
passing south of the islands of Fohr and Amrum and north of the islands
of Oland and Langeness,
shall be called upon to pronounce by a vote which will be taken under the
following conditions:
( 1) Within a period not exceeding ten days from the corning into force
of the present Treaty, the German troops and authorities (including the
Oberpriisidenten, Regierungs-priisidenten, Landriithe, Amtsuorsteher, Oberburgermeister) shall evacuate the zone lying to the north of the line above
fixed.
Within the same period the Workmen's and Soldiers' Councils which have
been constituted in this zone shall be dissolved; members of such COlmcils
who are natives of another region and are exercising their functions at the
date of the coming into force of the' present Treaty, or who have gone out of
office since March 1, 1919, shall also be evacuated.
The said zone shall immediately be placed under the authority of an
International.Oommission, composed of five members, of whom three will
be designated by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers; the Norwegian
and Swedisl;1 G~)Vernments will each be requested to designate a member;
ill

Printed in S, Doc. 51, 66th Cong., 1st ·sess., between pp. 160 and 161.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

103

in the event of their failing to do so, these two members will be chosen by
the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
The Commission, assisted in case of need by the necessary forces, shall
have general powers of administration. In particular, it shall at once provide
for filling the places of the evacuated German authorities, and if necessary
shall itself give orders for their evacuation, and proceed to fill the places of
such local authorities as may be required. It shall take all steps which it
thinks proper to ensure the freedom, fairness, and secrecy of the vote. It shall
be assisted by German and Danish technical advisers chosen by it from
among the local population. Its decisions will be taken by a majority.
One half of the expenses of the Commission and of the expenditure
occasioned by the plebiscite shall be paid by Germany.
(2) The right to vote shall be given to all persons, without distinction of
sex, who:
(a) Have completed their twentieth year at the date of the coming into
force of the present Treaty; and
( b) Were born in the zone in which the plebiscite is taken, or have been
domiciled there since a date before January 1, 1900, or had been expelled
by the German authorities without having retained their domicile there.
Every person will vote in the commune (Gemeinde) where he is domiciled
or of which he is a native.
Military persons, officers, non-commissioned officers and soldiers of the
German army, who are natives of the zone of Schleswig in which the plebiscite is taken, shall be given the opportunity to return to their native place in
order to take part in the voting there.
(3) In the· section of the evacuated zone lying to the north of a line,
from East to West (shown by a red line on map No.4 which is annexed to
the present Treaty) :
passing south of the island of Alsen and foUowing the median line of
Flensburg Fjord,
leaving the fjord about 6 kilometres north of Flensburg and following the
course of the stream flowing past Kupfermuhle upstream to a point north of
Niehuus,
passing north of Pattburg and Ellund and south of Froslee tq meet the
eastern boundary of the Kreis of Tondern at its junction with the boundary
between the old jurisc;lictions of Slogs and Kjrer (Slog Herred <l:nd KjlEr

Herred) ,
:following the latter boundary to where it meets the Scheidebek,
following the course of the Scheiddbek (Alte Au), Suder Au and Wied Au
downstream successively to the point where the latter bends northwards abo~t
1,500 metres west of Ruttebull,

104

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

thence, in a west-north-westerly direction to meet the North Sea north of
Sieltoft,
thence, passing north of the island of Sylt,
the vote above provided for shall be taken within a period not exceeding
three weeks after the evacuation of the country by the German troops and
authorities.
The result will be determined by the majority of votes cast in the whole of
this section. This result will be immediately communicated by the Commission to the Principal Allied and Associated Powers and proclaimed.
If the vote results in favour of the reincorporation of this territory in the
Kingdom of Denmark, the Danish Government in agreement with the Commission will be entitled to effect its occupation with their military and administrative authorities immediately after the proclamation.
(4) In the section of the evacuated zone situated to the south of the preceding section and to the north of the line which starts from the Baltic Sea
13 kilometres from Flensburg and ends north of the islands of Oland and
Langeness, the vote will be taken within a period not exceeding five weeks
after the plebiscite shall have been held in the first section.
The result will be determined by communes (Gemeinden) , in accordance
with the majority of the votes cast in each commune (Gemeinde).
ARTICLE

110

Pending a delimitation on the spot, a frontier line will be fixed by the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers according to a line based on the
result of the voting, and proposed by the International Commission, and
taking into account the particular geographical and economic conditions of
the localities in question.
'
From that time the Danish Government may effect the occupation of these
territories with the Danish civil and military authorities, and the German
Government may reinstate up to the said frontier line the German civil and
military authorities whom it has evacuated.
Germany hereby renounces definitively in favour of the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers all rights of sovereignty over the territories situated to.
the north of the frontier line fixed in accordance with the above provisions.
The Principal Allied and Associated Powers will hand over the said territories
to Denmark.
ARTICLE 111
A Commission composed of seven members, five of whom shall be nominated by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, one by Denmark, and
one by Germany, shall be constituted within fifteen days from the date when
the final result of the vote is known, to trace the frontier line on the spot.
The decisions of the Commission win be taken by a majority of votes and
shall be binding on the parties concerned.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-jUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

105

112

All the inhabitants of the territory which is returned to Denmark will acquire Danish nationality ipso facto) and will lose their German nationality.
Persons, however, who had become habitually resident in this territory
after October 1, 1918, will not be able to acquire Danish nationality without
permission from the Danish Government.
ARTICLE

113

Within two years from the date on which the sovereignty over the whole
or part of the territory of Schleswig subjected to the plebiscite is restored to
Denmark:
Any person over 18 years of age, born in the territory restored to Denmark,
not habitually resident in this region, and possessing German nationality, will
be entitled to opt for Denmark;
Any person over 18 years of age habitually resident in the territory restored
to Denmark will be entitled to opt for Germany.
Option by a husband will cover his wife and option by parents will cover
their children less than 18 years of age.
Persons who have exercised the above right to opt must within the ensuing
twelve months transfer their place of residence to the State in favour of which
they have opted.
They will be entitled to retain the immovable property which they own in
the territory of the other State in which they were habitually resident before
opting. They may carry with them their movable property of every description. No export or import duties may be imposed upon them in connection
with the removal of such property.
ARTICLE

114

The proportion and nature of the financial or other obligations of Germany
and Prussia which are to be assumed by Denmark will be fixed in accordance
with Article 254 of Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty.
Further stipulations will determine any other questions arising out of the
transfer to Denmark of the whole or part of the territory of which she was
deprived by the Treaty of October 30, 1864.
SECTION XIII

Heligoland
ARTICLE

115

The fortifications, military establishments, and harbours of the Islands of
Heligoland and Dune shall be destroyed under the supervision of the Princi-

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

106

pal Allied Governments by Gennan labour and at the expense of Germany
within a period to be determined by the said Governments.
The term "harbours" shall include the north-east mole, the west wall, the
outer and inner breakwaters and reclaimed land within them, and all naval
and military works, fortifications and buildings, constructed or under construction, between lines connecting the following positions taken from the
British Admiralty chart No. 126 of April 19, 1918.
(a)
.(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

lat.
-

54°
54°
54°
54°
54°

10'
10'
10'
10'
10'

49"
35"
14"
17"
44"

N.; long. 7° 53' 39" E.;
N.;
7° 54' 18" E.;
No;
7° 54' 00" Eo;
N.; 7° 53' 37" Eo;
N.; 7° 53' 26" Eo

These fortifications, military establishments and harbours shall not be
reconstructed nor shall any similar works be constructed in future.
SECTION XIV

Russia and Russian States
ARTICLE

116

Gennany acknowledges and agrees to respect as pennanent and inalienable the independence of all the territories which were part of the fonner
Russian Empire on August 1,1914.
In accordance with the provisions of Article 259 of Part IX (Financial
Clauses) and Article 292 of Part X (Economic Clauses) Germany accepts
definitely the abrogation of the Brest-Litovsk Treaties and of all other treaties,
conventions and agreements entered into by her with the Maximalist Government in Russia.
The Allied and Associated Powers formally reserve the rights of Russia
to obtain from Gennany restitution and reparation based on the principles
of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE 117
Germany undertakes to recognize the full force of all treaties or agreements which may be entered into by the Allied and Associated Powers with
States now existing or coming into existence in future in the whole or part of
the fonner Empire of Russia as it existed on August 1, 1914, and to recognize the frontiers of any such States as determined therein.
PART IV
GERMAN RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OUTSIDE GERMANY
ARTICLE.

118

In territory outside her European frontiers as fixed by the present Treaty,
Germany renoun'ces all right", titles and privileges whatever in or over terri-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-jUNE 28, 1919

107

tory which belonged to her or to her allies, and all right'>, titles and privileges
whatever their origin which she held as against the Allied and Associated
Powers.
Germany hereby undertakes to recognise and to conform to the measures
which may be taken now or in the future by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, in agreement where necessary with third Powers, in order
to carry the above stipulation into effect.
In particular Germany declares her acceptance of the following Articles
relating to certain special subjects.
SECTION I

German Colonies
ARTICLE

119

Germany renounces in favour of the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers all her rights and titles over her oversea possessions.
ARTICLE

120

All movable and immovable property in such territories belonging to the
German Empire or to any German State shall pass to the Government
exercising authority over such territories, on the terms laid down in Article
257 of Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty. The decision of
the local courts in any dispute as to the nature of such property shall be final.
ARTICLE

121

The provisions of Sections I and IV of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the
present Treaty shall apply in the case of these territories whatever be the form
of Government adopted for them.
ARTICLE

122

The Government exercising authority over such territories may make such
provisions as it thinks fit with reference to the repatriation from them of German nationals and to the conditions upon which German subjects of European origin shall, or sJ;lall not, be allowed to reside, hold property, trade
or exercise a profession in them. .
ARTICLE

123

The provisions of Article 260 of Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present
Treaty shall apply in the case of all agreements concluded with German nationals for the construction or exploitation of public works in the" German
oversea possessions, as well as any sub-concessions o~ contra<fts r~sulting there, ..
from which may have been made to or with such natiomlls.. ": .

108

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

ARTICLE 124
. Germany hereby undertakes to pay, in accordance with the estimate to be
presented by the French Government and approved by the Reparation Commission, reparation for damage suffered by French nationals in the Cameroons
or the frontier zone by reason of the acts of the German civil and military
authorities and of German private individuals during the period from
January 1,1900, to August 1, 1914.
ARTICLE 125
Germany renounces all rights under the Conventions and Agreements
with France of November 4, 1911, and September 28, 1912, relating to
Equatorial Africa. She undertakes to pay to the French Government, in
accordance with the estimate to be presented by that Government and
approved by the Reparation Commission, all the deposits, credits, advances,
etc., effected by virtue of these instruments in favour of Germany.
ARTICLE 126
Germany undertakes to accept and observe the agreements made or to be
made by the Allied and Associated Powers or some of them with any other
Power with regard to the trade in arms and spirits, and to the matters dealt
with in the General Act of Berlin of February'26, 1885, the General Act
of Brussels of July 2, 1890/4 and the conventions completing or modifying
the same.
ARTICLE 127
The native inhabitants of the former German oversea possessions shall
be entitled to the diplomatic protection of the Governments exercising
authority over those territories.
SECTION

II

China
ARTICLE 128
Germany renounces in favour of China all benefits and privileges resulting from the provisions of the final Protocol signed at Peking on September 7, 1901/5 and from all annexes, notes and documents supplementary
thereto. She likewise renounces in favour of China a~y claim to indemnities
accruing thereunder subsequent toMarch 14, 1917.
ARTICLE 129
From the coming into force of the present Treaty the High Contracting
Parties shall apply, in so far as concerns them respectively:
u
10

TS 383, ante, vol. 1, p. 134.
TS 397, ante, vol. 1, p. 302.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

109

(1) The Arrangement of August 29, 1902,16 regarding the new Chinese
customs tariff;
.
(2) The Arrangement of September 27, 1905,17 regarding Whang-Poo,
and the provisional supplementary Arrangement of April 4[9J, 1912.18
China, however, will no longer be bound to grant to Germany the advantages or privileges which she allowed Germany under these Arrangements.
ARTICLE

130

Subject to the provisions of Section VIII of this Part, Germany cedes to
China all the buildings, wharves and pontoons, barracks, forts, arms and
munitions of war, vessels of all kinds, wireless telegraphy installations and
other public property belonging to the German Government, which are
situated or may be in the German Concessions at Tientsin and Hankow or
elsewhere in Chinese territory.
It is understood, however, that premises used as diplomatic or consular
residences or offices are not included in the above cession, and, furthermore,
that no steps shall be taken by the Chinese Government to dispose of the
German public and private property situated within the so-called Legation
Quarter at Peking without the consent of the Diplomatic Representatives
of the Powers which, on the coming into force of the present Treaty, remain
Parties to the Final Protocol of September 7, 1901.
ARTICLE

131

Germany undertakes to restore to China within twelve months from the
coming into force of the present Treaty all the astronomical instruments
which her troops in 1900-1901 carried away from China, and to defray
all expenses which may be incurred in effecting such restoration, including
the expenses of dismounting, packing, transporting, insurance and installation
in Peking.
ARTICLE 132
Germany agrees to the abrogation of the leases from the Chinese Government under which the German Concessions at Hankow and Tientsin
are now held.
China, restored to the full exercise of her sovereign rights in the above
areas, declares her intention of opening them to international residence and
trade. She further declares that the abrogation of the leases under which
these concessions are now held shall not affect the property rights of nationals of Allied and Associated Powers who are holders of lots in these
concessions.
,. For the schedule of tariff duties agreed upon by representatives of the several powers at
Shanghai Aug. 29, 1902, see annex III of the commercial treaty between the United States
and China signed at Shanghai Oct. 8, 1903 (TS 430, post).
17 TS 448, ante, vo!. 1, p. 446.
16 Ante, vo!. 1, p. 879.

110

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

133

Germany waives all claims against the Chinese Government or against
any Allied or Associated Government arising out of the internment of German nationals in China and their repatriation. She equally renounces all
claims arising out of the capture and condemnation of German ships in
China, or the liquidation, sequestration or control of German properties,
rights and interests in that country since August 14, 1917. This provision,
however, shall not affect the rights of the parties interested in the proceeds
of any such liquidation, which shall be governed by the provisions of Part X
(Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

134

Germany renounces in favour of the Government of His Britannic Majesty
the German State property in the British Concession at Shameen at Canton.
She renounces in favour of the French and Chinese Governments conjointly
the property of the German school situated in the French Concession at
Shanghai.
SECTION m

Siam
ARTICLE

135

Germany recognises that all treaties, conventions and agreements between
her and Siam, and all rights, title and privileges derived therefrom, including
all rights of extraterritorial jurisdiction, terminated as from July 22, 1917.
ARTICLE

136

All goods and property in Siam belonging to the German Empire or to any
German State, with the exception of premises used as diplomatic or consular
residences or offices, pass ipso facto and without compensation to the Siamese
Government.
The goods, property and private rights of German nationals in Siam
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Part X (Economic
Clauses) of the present Treaty.
,

ARTICLE

137

Germany waives all claims against the Siamese Government on behalf
of herself or her nationals arising out of the seizure or condemnation of
German ships, the liquidation of German property, or the internment of
German nationals in Siam. This provision shall not affect the rights of the
parties interested in the proceeds of any such liquidation, which shall be
governed by the provisions of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present
Treaty.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

111

SECTION IV

Liberia
ARTICLE

138

Germany renounces all rights and privileges arising from the arrangements
of 1911 and 1912 regarding Liberia, and particularly the right to nominate
a German Receiver of Customs in Liberia.
She further renounces all claim to participate in any measures whatsoever which may be adopted for the rehabilitation of Liberia.
ARTICLE

139 .

Germany recognizes that all treaties and arrangements between her and
Liberia terminated as from August 4, 1917.
.
ARTICLE

140

The property, rights and interests of Germans in Liberia shall be dealt
with in accordance with Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty.
SECTION V

Morocco
ARTICLE

141

Germany renounces all rights, titles and privileges conferred on her by
the General Act of Algeciras of April 7, 1906/9 and by the Franco-German
Agreements of February 9, 1909, and November 4, 1911. All treaties, agreements, arrangements and contracts concluded by her with the Sherifian
Empire are regarded as abrogated as from August 3, 1914.
In no case can Germany take advantage of these instruments and she
undertakes not to intervene in any way in negotiations rdating to Morocco
which may take place between France and the other Powers.
ARTICLE

142

Germany having recognized the French Protectorate in Morocco, hereby
accepts all the consequences of its establishment, and she renounces the
regime of the capitulations therein.
This renunciation shall take effect as from August 3, 1914.
ARTICLE

143

The Sherifian Government shall have complete liberty of action in regu,. TS 456, ante, vol. 1, p. 464.

112

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

lating the status of German nationals in Morocco and the conditions in
which they may establish themselves there.
German protected persons, semsars and "associes agricoles" shall be
considered as having ceased, as from August 3, 1914, to enjoy the privileges
attached to their status and shall be subject to the ordinary law.
ARTICLE

144

All property and possessions in the Sherifian Empire of the German Empire and the German States pass to the Maghzen without payment.
For this purpose, the property and possessions of the German Empire and
States shall be deemed to include all the property of the Crown, the Empire
or the States, and the private· property of the former German Emperor and
other Royal personages.
All movable and immovable property in the Sherifian Empire belonging
to German nationals shall be dealt with in accordance with Sections III and
IV of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty.
Mining rights which may be recognised as belonging to German nationals
by the Court of Arbitration set up under the Moroccan Mining Regulations
shall form the subject of a valuation, which the arbitrators shall be requested
to make, and these rights shall then be treated in the same way as property
in Morocco belonging to German nationals.
ARTICLE

145

The German Government shall ensure the transfer to a person nominated
by the French Government of the shares representing Germany's portion of
the capital of the State Bank of Morocco. The value of these shares, as assessed
by the Reparation Commission, shall be paid to the Reparation Commission
for the credit of Germany on account of the sums due for reparation. The
German Government shall be responsible for indemnifying its nationals 1'0
dispossessed.
This transfer will take place without prejudice to the repayment of debts
which German nationals may have contracted towards the State Bank of
Morocco.
ARTICLE 146
Moroccan goods entering Germany shall enjoy the treatment accorded to
French goods.
SECTION VI

Egypt
ARTICLE 147
Germany declares that she recognises the Protectorate proclaimed over
Egypt by Great Britain on December 18, 1914, and that she renounces the
regime of the Capitulations in Egypt.
This renunciation shall take effect as from August 4, 1914.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

113

148

All treaties, agreements, arrangements and contracts concluded by Germany with Egypt are regarded as abrogated as from August 4, 1914.
In no case can Germany avail herself of these instruments and she undertakes not to intervene in any way in negotiations relating to Egypt which may
take place between Great Britain and the other Powers.
ARTICLE

149

Until an Egyptian law of judicial organization establishing courts with
universal jurisdiction comes into force, provision shall be made, by means of
decrees issued by His Highness the Sultan, for the exercise of jurisdiction over
German nationals and property by the British Consular Tribunals.
ARTICLE

150

The Egyptian Government shall have complete liberty of action in regulating the status of German nationals and the conditions under which they may
establish themselves in Egypt.
ARTICLE 151
Germany consents to the abrogation of the decree issued by His Highness
the Khedive on November 28, 1904, relating to the Commission of the
Egyptian Public Debt, or to such changes as the Egyptian Government may
think it desirable to make therein.
ARTICLE

152

Germany consents, in so far as she is concerned, to the transfer to His
Britannic Majesty's Government of the powers conferred on His Imperial
Majesty the Sultan by the Convention signed at Constantinople on October
29,1888, relating to the free navigation of the Suez Canal.
She renounces all participation in the Sanitary, Maritime, and Quarantine
Board of Egypt and consents, in so far as she is concerned, to the transfer to
the Egyptian Authorities of the powers of that Board.
ARTICLE

153

All property and possessions in Egypt of the German Empire and the
German States pass to the Egyptian Government without payment.
For this purpose, the property and possessions of the German Empire and
States shall be deemed to include all the property of the Crown, the Empire
or the States, and the private property of the former German Emperor and
other Royal personages.
All movable and immovable property in Egypt belonging to German
nationals shall be dealt with in accordance with Sections III and IV of Part X
(Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty.

114

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

154

Egyptian goods entering Germany shall enjoy the treatment accorded to
British goods.
SECTION VII

Turkey and Bulgaria
ARTICLE

155

Germany undertakes to recognise and accept all arrangements which the
Allied and Associated Powers may make with Turkey and Bulgaria with
reference to any rights, interests and privileges whatever which might be
claimed by Germany or her nationals in Turkey and Bulgaria and which are
not dealt with in the provisions of the present Treaty.
SECTION VIII

Shantung
ARTICLE

156

Germany renounces, in favour of Japan, all her rights, title and privilegesparticularly those concerning the territory of Kiaochow, railways, mines
and submarine cables-which she acquired in virtue of the Treaty concluded
by her with China on March 6, 1898, and of all other arrangements relative
to the Province of Shantung.
All German rights in the Tsingtao-Tsinanfu Railway, including its branch
lines, together with its subsidiary property of all kinds, stations, shops, fixed
and rolling stock, mines, plant and material for the exploitation of the mines,
are and remain acquired by Japan, together with all rights and privileges
attaching thereto.
The German State submarine cables from Tsingtao to Shanghai and from
Tsingtao to Chefoo, with all the rights, privileges and properties attaching
thereto, are similarly acquired by Japan, free and clear of all charges and
encumbrances.
ARTICLE 157
The movable and immovable property owned by the German State in
the territory of Kiaochow, as well as all the rights which Germany might·
claim in consequence of the works or improvements made or of the expenses
incurred by her, directly or indirectly, in connection with this territory,
are and remain acquired by Japan, free and clear of all charges and encumbrances.
ARTICLE 158
Germany shall hand over to Japan within three months from the coming
into force of the present Treaty the archives, registers, plans, title-deeds and

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

115

documents of every kind, wherever they may be, relating to the administration, whether civil, military, financial, judicial or other, of the territory of
Kiaochow.
Within the same period Germany shall give particulars to Japan of all
treaties, arrangements or agreements relating to the rights, title or privilegeS
referred to in the two preceding Articles.
PART V

MILITARY, NAVAL AND AIR CLAUSES
In order to render possible the initiation of a general limitation of the
armaments of all nations, Germany undertakes strictly to observe the military,
naval and air clauses which follow.
SECTION I

Military Clauses
CHAPTER

I

EFFECTIVES AND CADRES OF THE GERMAN ARMY
ARTICLE

159

The German military forces shall be demobilized and reduced as prescribed
hereinafter.
ARTICLE 160
(1) By a date which must not be later than March 31, 1920, the German
Army must not comprise more than seven divisions of infantry and three
divisions of cavalry.
After that date the total number of effectives in the Army of the States
constituting Germany must not exceed one hundred thousand men, including officers and establishments of depots. The Army shall be devoted exclusively to the maintenance of order within the territory and to the control
of the frontiers.
The total effective strength of officers, including the personnel of staffs,
whatever their composition, must not exceed four thousand.
(2) Divisions and Army Corps headquarters staffs shall be organised in
accordance with Table No. I annexed to this Section.
The number and strengths of the units of infantry, artillery, engineers,
technical services and troops laid down in the aforesaid Table constitute
maxima which must not be exceeded.
The following units may each have their own depot:
An Infantry regiment;
A Cavalry regiment;
A regiment of Field Artillery;
A battalion of Pioneers.
~

116

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

(3) The divisions must not be grouped under more than two army corps
headquarters staffs.
The maintenance or formation of forces differently grouped or of other
organisations for the command of troops or for preparation for war is
forbidden.
The Great Germany General Staff and all similar organisations shall be
dissolved and may not be reconstituted in any form.
The officers, or persons in the position of officers, in the Ministries of War
in the different States in Germany and in the Administrations attached to
them, must not exceed three hundred in number and are included in the
maximum strength of four thousand laid down in the third sub-paragraph
of paragraph (1 ) of this Article.
ARTICLE

161

Army administrative services consisting of civilian personnel not included
in the number of effectives prescribed by the present Treaty will have such
personnel reduced in each class to one-tenth of that laid down in the Budget
of 1913.
ARTICLE 162
The number of employees or officials of the German States, such as customs
officers, forest guards and coastguards, shall not exceed that of the employees
or officials functioning in these capacities in 1913.
The number of gendarmes and employees or officials of the local or
municipal police may only be increased to an extent corresponding to the
increase of population since 1913 in the districts or municipalities in which
they are employed.
These employees and officials may not be assembled for military training.
ARTICLE

163

The reduction of the strength of the German military forces as provided
for in Article 160 may be effected gradually in the following manner:
Within three months from the coming into force of the present Treaty the
total number of effectives must be reduced to 200,000 and the number of
units must not exceed twice the number of those laid down in Article 160;
At the expiration of this period, and at the end of each subsequent period
of three months, a Conference of military experts of the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers will fix the reductions to be made in the ensuing three
months, so that by March 31, 1920, at the latest the total number of German
effectives does not exceed the maximum number of 100,000 men laid down in
Article 160. In these successive reductions the same ratio between the number

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

117

of officers and of men, and between the various kinds of units, shall be maintained as is laid down in that Article.
CHAPTER

II

ARMAMENT, MUNITIONS AND MATERIAL
ARTICLE

164

Up till the time at which Germany is admitted as a member of the League
of Nations the German Army must not possess an armament greater than the
amounts fixed in Table No. II annexed to this Section, with the exception of
an optional increase not exceeding one-twenty-fifth part for small arms and
one-fiftieth part for guns, which shall be exclusively used to provide for such
eventual replacements as may be necessary.
Germany agrees that after· she has become a member of the League of
Nations the armaments fixed in the said Table shall remain in force until
they are modified by the Council of the League. Furthermore she hereby
agrees strictly to observe the decisions of the Council of the League on this
subject.
ARTICLE 165
The maximum number of guns, machine guns, trench-mortars, rifles and
the amount of ammunition and equipment which Germany is allowed to
maintain during the period between the coming into force of the present
Treaty and the date of March 31, 1920, referred to in Article 160, shall bear
the same proportion to the amount authorized in Table No. III annexed to
this Section as the strength of the German Army as reduced from time to time
in accordance with Article 163 bears to the strength permitted under Article
160.
ARTICLE 166
At the date of March 31, 1920, the stock of munitions which the German
Army may have at its disposal shall not exceed the amounts fixed in Table
No. III annexed to this Section.
Within the same period the German Government will store these stocks
at points to be notified to the Governments of the Principal Allied and Asso.
ciated Powers. The German Government is forbidden to establish any other
stocks, depots or reserves of munitions.
ARTICLE

167

The number and calibre of the guns constituting at the date of the
coming into force of the present Treaty the armament of the fortified works,
fortresses, and any land or coast forts which Gennany is allowed to retain

118

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

must be notified immediately by the Gennan Government to the Governments
of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, and will constitute maximum
amounts which may not be exceeded.
Within two months from the coming into force of the present Treaty, the
maximum stock of ammunition for these guns will be reduced to, and
maintained at, the following unifonn rates:-fifteen hundred rounds per
piece for those the calibre of which is 10.5 em. and under: five hundred
rounds per piece for those of higher calibre.
ARTICLE

168

The manufacture of arms, mumtIOns, or any war material, shall only
be carried out in factories or works the location of which shall be communicated to and approved by the Governments of the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers, and the number of which they retain the right to restrict.
Within three months from the coming into force of the present Treaty, all
other establishments for the manufacture, preparation, storage or design of
arms, munitions, or any war material whatever shall be closed down. The
same applies to all arsenals except those used as depots for the authorised
stocks of munitions. Within the same period the personnel of these arsenals
will be dismissed.
ARTICLE 169
Within two months from the coming into force of the present Treaty
German arms, munitions and war material, including anti-aircraft material,
existing in Germany in excess of the quantities allowed, must be. surrendered
to the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers to be
destroyed or rendered useless. This will also apply to any special plant intended for the manufacture of military material, except such as may be
recognised as necessary for equipping the authorised strength of the German
army.
The surrender in question will be effected at such points in German territory as may be selected by the said Governments.
Within the same period arms, munitions and war material, including
anti-aircraft material, of origin other than Gennan, in whatever state they
rpay be, will be delivered to the said Governments, who will decide as to their
disposal.
Arms and munitions which on account of the successive reductions in the
strength of the German anny become in excess of the amounts authorized
by Tables II and III annexed to this Section must be handed over in the
J,nanner laid down above within such periods as may be decided by the
ponferences referred to in Article 163.

TR,EATY OF VERSAILLES-'-JUNE 28,
ARTICLE

191~

119

170

Importation into Germany of arms, munitions and war material of every
kind shall be strictly prohibited.
.
The same applies to the manufacture. for, and export to, foreign countries
of arms, munition~ and war material of every kind.
ARTICLE

171

The use of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases and all analogous liquids,
materials or devices being prohibited, their manufacture and importation
are strictly forbidden in Germany.
The same applies to materials specially intended for the manufacture,
storage and use of the said products or devices.
The manufacture and the importation into Germany of armoured cars,
tanks and all similar constructions suitable for use in war are also prohibited.
ARTICLE

172

Within a period of three months from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, the German Government will disclose to the Governments of the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers the nature and mode of manufacture
of all explosives, toxic substances or other like chemical" preparations used
by them in the war or prepared by them for the purpose of being so used.
CHAPTER

III

RECRUITING AND MILITARY TRAINING
ARTICLE

173

Universal compulsory military service shall be abolished in Germany.
The German Army may only be constituted and recruited by means of
voluntary enlistment.
ARTICLE 174
The period of eplistment for .non-commissioned officers and privates must
.
be twelve consecutive years.
The number of men discharged for any reason before the expiration of
their term of enlistment must not exceed in any year five per cent. of the
total effectives fixed by the second sub-paragraph of paragraph (1) of
Article 160 of the present Treaty.··
ARTICLE

175

The officers who are retained in the Army must undertake the obligation
to serve in it up to the age of forty-five years at least.
Officers newly appointed must undertake to serve on the active list for
twenty-five consecutive years at least.

120

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Officers who have previously belonged to any fonnations whatever of the
Anny, and who are not retained in the units allowed to be maintained, must
not take part in any military exercise whether theoretical or practical, and
will not be under any military obligations whatever.
The number of officers discharged for any reason before the expiration of
their tenn of service must not exceed in any year five per cent. of the total
cffectives of officers provided for in the third sub-paragraph of paragraph
(I) of Article 160 of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE,

176

On the expiration of two months from the coming into force of the present
Treaty there must only exist in Gennany the number of military schools
which is absolutely indispensable for the recruitment of the officers of the units
allowed. These schools will be exclusively intended for the recruitment of
officers of each arm, in the proportion of one school per arm.
The number of students admitted to attend the courses of the said schools
will be strictly in proportion to the vacancies to be filled in the cadres of
officers. The students and the cadres will be reckoned in the effectives fixed by
the second and third sub-paragraphs of paragraph (1) of Article 160 of
the present Treaty.
Consequently, and during the period fixed above, all military academies
or similar institutions in Gennany, as well as the different military schools
for officers, student officers (Aspiranten) , cadets, non-commissioned officers
or student non-commissioned officers (Aspiranten), other than the schools
above provided for, will be abolished.
ARTICLE

177

Educational establishments, the universities, societies of discharged soldiers,
shooting or touring clubs and, generally speaking, associations of every
description, whatever be the age of their members, must not occupy themselves with any military matters.
In particular they will be forbidden to instruct or exercise their members, or
to allow them to be instructed or exercised, in the profession or use of anns.
These societies, associations, educational establishments and universities
must have no connection with the Ministries of War or any other military
authority.
ARTICLE 178
All measures of mobilization or appertaining to mobilization are forbidden.
In no case must fonnations, administrative services or General Staffs include supplementary cadres.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

121

179

Gennany agrees, from the coming into force of the present Treaty, not
to accredit nor to send to any foreign country any military, naval or air
mission, nor to allow any such mission to leave her territory, and Gennany
further agrees to take appropriate measures to prevent Gennan nationals
from leaving her territory to become enrolled in the Anny, Navy or Air
service of any foreign Power, or to be attached to such Anny, Navy or Air
service for the purpose of assisting in the military, naval or air training
thereof, or otherwise for the purpose of giving military, naval or air instruction in any foreign country.
The Allied and Associated Powers agree, so far as they are concerned,
from the coming into force of the present Treaty, not to enrol in nor to
attach to their armies or naval or air forces any German national for the
purpose of assisting in the military training of such annies or naval or air
forces, or otherwise to employ any such German national as military, naval
or aeronautic instructor.
The present provision does not, however, affect the right of France to
recruit for the Foreign Legion in accordance with French military laws and
regulations.
CHAPTER IV
FORTIFICATIONS
ARTICLE

180

All fortified works, fortresses and field works situated in German territory
to the west of a line drawn fifty kilometres to the east of the Rhine shall be
disarmed and dismantled.
Within a period of two months from the coming into force of the present
Treaty such of the above fortified works, fortresses and field works as are
situated in territory not occupied by Allied and Associated troops shall be
disanned, and within a further period of four months they shall be dismantled. Those which are situated in territory occupied by Allied and
Associated troops shall be disanned and dismantled within such periods as
may be fixed by the Allied High Command.
The construction of any new fortification, whatever its nature and importance, is forbidden in the zone referred to in the first paragraph above.
The system of fortified works of the southern and eastern frontiers of
Gennany shall be maintained in its existing state.

2Hi-916-G9-9

122

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

TABLE NO. I
STATE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF ARMY CORPS HEADQUARTERS STAFFS AND OF
INFANTRY AND CAVALRY DIVISIONS

These tabular statements do not form a fixed establishment to be imposed on Germany, but
the figures contained in them (number of units and strengths) represent maximum figures,
which should not in any case be exceeded.
I. ARMY CORPS HEADQUARTERS STAFFS

--Maximum strengths
of each unit
Unit

Army Corps Headquarters Staff ....................

Maximum
No.
authorised

N.C.O.'s
and men

Officers

2

Total for Headquarters Staffs ................. ..........

30

150

60

300

II. ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INFANTRY DIVISION

Unit

Maximum
No. of
such units
in a single
division

Maximum strengths
of each unit

Officers

I N.C.O.'s
and men
I

----- ---------Headquarters of an infantry division... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Headquarters of divisional infantry ..................
Headquarters of divisional artillery ..................
Regiment of infantry ..............................
(Each regiment comprises 3 battalions of infantry.
Each battalion comprises 3 companies of infantry
and I machine-gun company.)
Trench mortar company.. .. . ......................
Divisional squadron ...............................
Field artillery regiment ............................
(Each regiment comprises 3 groups of artillery. Each
group comprises 3 batteries.)
Pioneer battalion .................................
(This battalion comprises 2 companies of pioneers, I
pontoon detachment, I searchlight section.)
Signal detachment ................................
(This detachment comprises I telephone detachment,
I listening section, I carrier pigeon section.)
Divisional medical service..........................
Parks and convoys ................................

25
4
4
70

70
30
30
2, 300

3

6

I
I

6
85

150
150
1,300

I

12

400

I

12

300

..........

I

20
14

400
800

Total for infantry division..................... ..........

410

10,830

I
I
I

3

123

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
III. ESTABLISHMENT OF A CAVALRY DIVISION

Maximum
No. of
such units
in a single
division

Unit

Headquarters of a cavalry division. , .. , . , , , , . , .. , . , ,
Cavalry regiment ..................... , ...........
(Each regiment comprises 4 squadrons.)
Horse artillery group (3 batteries) ....... , .. , .... , . , .

Maximum strengths
of each unit
Officers

1
6

15
40

50
800

1

20

400

275

5,250

Total for cavalry division .... , ...... , , . , . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . .

TABLE

NO.

N.C.O.'s
and men

II

TABULAR STATEMENT OF ARMAMENT ESTABLISHMENT FOR A MAXIMUM OF
SEVEN INFANTRY DIVISIONS, THREE CAVALRY DIVISIONS, AND Two ARMY
CORPS HEADQUARTERS STAFFS

For 3
For 7
Total 0 f
infanCav- cavalry Two army corps head- columns
ditry di- alry diquarters staffs
2,4,
visions vision visions
and 5

Infantry division

Material

(1)

(4)

(3)

(2)

------

(5)

(6)

Rifles: . , .............. 12,000 84,000 ....... ...... . This establishment
6,000 18,000
must be drawn
Carbines .............. ...... .
756
12
from the increased
Heavy machine guns....
108
36
Light machine guns. ....
armaments of the
162 1,134 ...... . . . . . . . .
63 ...... . . . . . . . .
divisional infantry.
Medium trench mortars.
9
Light trench mortars. ...
27
189 ...... . .......
24
168
12
36
7.7 em. guns...... , ....
84 ....... ...... .
10.5 em. howitzers. .....
12

TABLE

NO.

84,00o
18,000
792
1, 134
63
189
204
84

III

MAXIMUM STOCKS AUTHORISED

Maximum
number
of Arms
authorised

Material

Rifles
Carbines
,
Heavy machine guns
Light machine guns. .
Medium trench mortars
Light trench mortars
Field artillery:
7.7 em. guns
10.5 em. howitzers

84,000
18,000
792'
1,134
63
189

.
.
.
,.
,

.
.
,

,

.
.

204
84

Establishment
per unit

Maximum
totals

Rounds

Rounds

}
}

400 40,800,000
8,000 15,408,000
400
25,200
800
151,200
1,000
800

204,000
67,200

124

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
SECTION II

Naval Clauses
ARTICLE

181

Mter the expiration of a period of two months from the coming into force
of the present Treaty the German naval forces in commission must not exceed:
6 battleships of the Deutschland or Lothringen type,
6 light cruisers,
12 destroyers,
12 torpedo boats,
or an equal number of ships constructed to replace them as provided
Article 190.

In

No submarines are to be included.

All other warships, except where there is provision to the contrary in the
present Treaty, must be placed in reserve or devoted to commercial purposes.
ARTICLE

182

Until the completion of the minesweeping prescribed by Article 193 Germany will keep in commission such number of minesweeping vessels as may be
fixed by the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

183

After the expiration of a period of two months from the coming into force
of the present Treaty the total personnel of the German Navy, including the
manning of the fleet, coast defences, signal stations, administration and other
land services, must not exceed fifteen thousand, including officers and men of
all grades and corps.
The total strength of officers and warrant officers must not exceed fifteen
hundred.
Within two months from the coming into force of the present Treaty the
personnel in excess of the above strength shall be demobilized.
No naval or military corps or reserve force in connection with the Navy
may be organised in Germany without being included in the above strength.
ARTICLE

184

From the date of the coming into force of the preSent Treaty all the German
surface warships which are not in German ports cease to belong to Germany,
who renounces all rights over them.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

125

Vessels which, in compliance with the Armistice of November 11,1918, are
now interned in the ports of the Allied and Associated Powers are declared to
be finally surrendered.
Vessels which are now interned in neutral ports will be there surrendered to
the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers. The German
Government must address a notification to that effect to the neutral Powers
on the coming into force of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

185

Within a period of two months from the coming into force of the present
Treaty the German surface warships enumerated below will be surrendered to
the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers in such Allied
ports as the said Powers may direct.
These warships will have been disarmed as provided in Article XXIII of
the Armistice of November 11, 1918. Nevertheless they must have all their
guns on board.
BATTLESHIPS

Oldenburg
Thuringen
Ostfriesland
Helgoland

Posen
Westfalen
Rheinland
Nassau
LIGHT CRUISERS

Stralsund
Augsburg
Kolberg
Stuttgart

Stettin
Danzig
Milnchen
Lilbeck

and, in addition, forty-two modern destroyers and fifty modern torpedo boats,
as chosen by the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

186

On the coming into force of the present Treaty the German Government
must undertake, under the supervision of the Governments of the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers, the breaking-lIp of all the German surface
warships now under construction.
ARTICLE

187

The German auxiliary cruisers and fleet auxiliaries enumerated below will
be disarmed and treated as merchant ships.

126

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
INTERNED IN

NEUTRAL COUNTRIES:

Berlin
Santa Fe

Seydliz
Yorck
IN

GERMANY:

Ammon
Answald
Bosnia
Cordoba
Cassel
Dania
Rio Negro
Rio Pardo
Santa Cruz
Schwaben
Solingen
Steigerwald
Franken
Gundomar

Furst Bulow
Gertrud
Kigoma
Rugia
Santa Elena
Schleswig
Miiwe
Sierra Ventana
Chemnitz
Emil Georg von Strauss
Habsburg
Meteor
Waltraute
Scharnhorst
ARTICLE

188

On the expiration of one month from the coming into force of the present
Treaty all Gennan submarines, submarine salvage vessels and docks for submarines, including the tubular dock, must have been handed over to the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
Such of these submarines, vessels and docks as are considered by the said
Governments to be fit to proceed under their own power or to be towed shall
be taken by the German Government into such Allied ports as have been
indicated.
The remainder, and also those in course of construction, shall be broken
up entirely by the Gennan Government under the supervision of the said
Governments. The breaking-up must be completed within three months at
the most after the coming into force of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

189

Articles, machinery and material arising from the breaking-up of German
warships of all kinds, whether surface vessels or submarines, may not be used
except for purely industrial or commercial purposes.
They may not be sold or disposed of to foreign countries.
ARTICLE

190

Germany is forbidden to construct or acquire any warships other than those
intended to replace the units in commission provided for in Article 181 of the
present Treaty.
The warships intended for replacement purposes as above shall not exceed
the following displacement:
Armoured ships
Light cruisers
Destroyers
Torpedo boats.

.
.
.

.
.

10,000 tons,
6, 000 tons,
800 tons,
200 tons.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

127

Except where a ship has been lost, units of the different classes shall only be
replaced at the end of a period of twenty years in the case of battleships and
cruisers, and fifteen years in the case of destroyers and torpedo boats, counting
from the launching of the ship.
ARTICLE

191

The construction or acquisition of any submarine, even for commercial
purposes, shall be forbidden in Germany.
ARTICLE

192

The warships in commission of the German fleet must have on board
or in reserve only the allowance of arms, munitions and war material fixed
by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
Within a month from the fixing of the quantities as above, arms, munitions and war material of all kinds, including mines and torpedoes, now in
the hands of the German Government and in excess of the said quantities,
shall be surrendered to the Governments of the said Powers at places to be
indicated by them. Such arms, munitions and war material will be destroyed
or rendered useless.
All other stocks, depots or reserves of arms, munitions or naval war
material of all kinds are forbidden.
The manufacture of these articles in German territory for, and their
export to, foreign countries shall be forbidden.
ARTICLE

193

On the coming into force of the present Treaty Germany will forthwith
sweep up the mines in the following areas in the North Sea to the eastward
of longitude 4°00' E. of Greenwich:
( 1) Between parallels of latitude 53 °00' N. and 59°00' N.; (2) To the.
northward of latitude 60°30' N.
Germany must keep these areas free from mines.
Germany must also sweep and keep free from mines such areas in the
Baltic as may ultimately be notified by the Governments of the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

194

The personnel of the German Navy shall be recruited entirely by voluntary
engagements entered into for a minimum period of twenty-five consecutive
years for officers and warrant officers; twelve consecutive years for petty
officers and men.

128

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

The number engaged to replace those discharged for any reason before
the expiration_of their term of service must not exceed five per cent. per
annum of the totals laid down in this Section (Article 183).
The personnel discharged from the Navy must not receive any kind of
naval or military training or undertake any further service in the Navy or
Army.
Officers belonging to the German Navy and not demobilised must engage
to serve till the age of forty-five, unless discharged for sufficient reasons.
No officer or man of the German mercantile marine shall receive any
training in the Navy.
ARTICLE 195
In order to ensure free passage into the Baltic to all nations, Germany
shall not erect any fortifications in the area comprised between latitudes
55°27' N. and 54°00' N. and longitudes 9°00' E. and 16°00' E. of the
meridian of Greenwich, nor instal any guns commanding the maritime routes
between the North Sea and the Baltic. The fortifications now existing in
this area shall be demolished and the guns removed under the supervision
of the Allied Governments and in periods to be fixed by them.
The German Government shall place at the disposal of the Governments
of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers all hydrographical information
now in its possession concerning the channels and adjoining waters between
the Baltic and the North Sea.
ARTICLE 196
All fortified works and fortifications, other than those mentioned in Section XIII (Heligoland) of Part III (Political Clauses for Europe) and in
Article 195, now established within fifty kilometres of the German coast or
on German islands off that coast shall be considered as of a defensive nature
and may remain in their existing condition.
No new fortifications shall be constructed within these limits. The armament of these defences shall not exceed, as regards the number and
calibre of guns, those in position at the date of the coming into force of the
present Treaty. The German Government shall communicate forthwith
particulars thereof to all the European Governments.
On the expiration of a period of two months from the coming into force
of the present Treaty the stocks of ammunition for these guns shall be reduced
to and maintained at a maximum figure of fifteen hundred rounds per piece
for calibres of 4.1-inch and under, and five hundred rounds per piece for
higher calibres.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

129

197

During the three months following the coming into force of the present
Treaty the German high-power wireless telegraphy stations at Nauen, Hanover and Berlin shall not be used for the transmission of messages concerning
naval, military or political questions of interest to Germany or any State which
has been allied to Germany in the war, without the assent of the Governments
of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers. These stations may be used
for commercial purposes, but only under the supervision of the said Governments, who will decide the wave-length to be used.
During the same period Germany shall not build any more high-power
wireless telegraphy stations in her own territory or that of Austria, Hungary,
Bulgaria or Turkey.
SECTION III

Air Clauses
ARTICLE

198

The armed forces of Germany must not include any military or naval air
forces.
Germany may, during a period not extending beyond October 1, 1919,
maintain a maximum number of one hundred seaplanes or flying boats, which
shall be exclusively employed in searching for submarine mines, shall be furnished with the necessary equipment for this purpose, and shall in no case
carry arms, munitions or bombs of any nature whatever.
In addition to the engines installed in the seaplanes or flying boats above
mentioned, one spare engine may be provided for each engine of each of these
craft.
No dirigible shall be kept.
ARTICLE 199
Within two months from the coming into force of the present Treaty the
personnel of air forces on the rolls of the German land and sea forces shall be
demobilised. Up to October 1, 1919, however, Germany may keep and
maintain a total number of one thousand men, including officers, for the
whole of the cadres and personnel, flying and non-flying, of all formations and
establishments.
ARTICLE

200

Until the complete evacuation of German territory by the Allied and Associated troops, the aircraft of the Allied and Associated Powers shall enjoy in
Germany freedom of passage through the air, freedom of transit and of
landing.
219~16~09----10

130

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

201

During the six months following the coming into force of the present Treaty,
the manufacture and importation of aircraft, parts of aircraft, engines for
aircraft, and parts of engines for aircraft, shall be forbidden in all German
territory.
ARTICLE

202

On the coming into force of the present Treaty, all military and naval
aeronautical material, except the machines mentioned in the second and
third paragraphs of Article 198, must be delivered to the Governments of the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
Delivery must be effected at such places as the said Governments may
select, and must be completed within three months.
In particular, this material will include all items under the following heads
which are or have been in use or were designed for warlike purposes:
Complete aeroplanes and seaplanes, as well as those being manufactured,
repaired or assembled.
Dirigibles able to take the air, being manufactured, repaired or assembled.
Plant for the manufacture of hydrogen.
Dirigible sheds and shelters of every kind for aircraft.
Pending their delivery, dirigibles will, at the expense of Germany, be maintained inflated with hydrogen; the plant for the manufacture of hydrogen, as
well as the sheds for dirigibles, may, at the discretion of the said Powers, be left
to Germany until the time when the dirigibles are handed over.
Engines for aircraft.
Nacelles and fuselages.
Armament (guns, machine guns, light machine guns, bomb-dropping
apparatus, torpedo-dropping apparatus, synchronization apparatus, aiming
apparatus) .
Munitions (cartridges, shells, bombs loaded or unloaded, stocks of explosives or of material for their manufacture) .
Instruments for use on aircraft.
Wireless apparatus and photographic or cinematograph apparatus for
use on aircraft.
Component parts of any of the items under the preceding heads.
The material referred to above shall not be removed without special permission from the said Governments.
SECTION IV

Inter-Allied Commissions of Control
ARTICLE

203

All the military, naval and air clauses contained in the present Treaty,
for the execution of which a time-limit is prescribed, shall be executed by

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

131

Germany under the control of Inter-Allied Commissions specially appointed
for this purpose by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

204

The Inter-Allied Commissions of Control will be specially charged with
the duty of seeing to the complete execution of the delivery, destruction,
demolition and rendering things useless to be carried out at the expense of the
German Government in accordance with the present Treaty.
They will communicate to the German authorities the decisions which the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers have reserved the right to take, or
which the execution of the military, naval and air clauses may necessitate.
. ARTICLE

205

The Inter-Allied Commissions of Control may establish their organisations
at the seat of the central German Government.
They shall be entitled as often as they think desirable to proceed to any
point whatever in German territory, or to send sub-commissions, or to authorize one or more of their members to go, to any such point.
ARTICLE

206

The German Government must give all necessary facilities for the accomplishment of their missions to the Inter-Allied Commissions of Control and
to their members.
It shall attach a qualified representative to each Inter-Allied Commission
of Control for the purpose of receiving the communications which the Commission may have to address to the German Government and of supplying
or procuring for the Commission all information or documents which may
be required.
The German Government must in all cases furnish at its own cost all labour
and material required to effect the deliveries and the works of destruction,
dismantling, demolition, and of rendering things useless, provided for in
the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

207

The upkeep and cost of the Commissions of Control and the expenses
involved by their work shall be borne by Germany.
ARTICLE

208

The Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control will represent the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers in dealing with the
German Government in all matters concerning the execution of the military
clauses.

132

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

In particular it will be its duty to receive from the German Government
the notifications relating to the location of the stocks and depots of munitions,
the armament of the fortified works, fortresses and forts which Germany
is allowed to retain, and the location of the works or factories for the production of arms, munitions and war material and their operations.
It will take delivery of the arms, munitions and war material, will select
the points where such delivery is to be effected, and will supervise the works
of destruction, demolition, and of rendering things useless, which are to be
carried out in accordance with the present Treaty.
The German Government must furnish to the Military Inter-Allied Commission of Control all such information and documents as the latter may deem
necessary to ensure the complete execution of the military clauses, and in
particular all legislative and administrative documents and regulations.
ARTICLE

209

The Naval Inter-Allied Commission of Control will represent the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers in dealing with the
German Government in all matters concerning the execution of the naval
clauses.
In particular it will be its duty to proceed to the building yards and to
supervise the breaking-up of the ships which are under construction there,
to take delivery of all surface ships or submarines, salvage ships, docks and
the tubular dock, and to supervise the destruction and breaking-up provided
for.
The German Government must furnish to the Naval Inter-Allied Commission of Control all such information and documents as the Commission
may deem necessary to ensure the complete execution of the naval clauses,
in particular the design of the warships, the composition of their armaments,
the details and models of the guns, munitions, torpedoes, mines, explosives,
wireless telegraphic apparatus and, in general, everything relating to naval
war material, as well as all legislative or administrative documents or
regulations.
ARTICLE

210

The Aeronautical Inter-Allied Commission of Control will represent the
Governments of the Principal Allied and Associate Powers in dealing with
the German Government in all matters concerning the execution of the air
clauses.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

133

In particular it will be its duty to make an inventory of the aeronautical
material existing in German territory, to inspect aeroplane, balloon and
motor manufactories, and factories producing arms, munitions and explosives capable of being used by aircraft, to visit all aerodromes, sheds, landing
grounds, parks and depots, to authorise, where necessary, a removal of
material and to take delivery of such material.
The German Government must furnish to the Aeronautical Inter-Allied
Commission of Control all such information and legislative, administrative
or other documents which the Commission may consider necessary to ensure
the complete execution of the air clauses, and in particular a list of the
personnel belonging to all the German Air Services, and of the existing material, as well as of that in process of manufacture or on order, and a list of
all establishments working for aviation, of their positions, and of all sheds and
landing grounds.
SE'CTION V

General A,rticles
ARTICLE

211

After the expiration of a period of three months from the coming into
force of the present Treaty, the German laws must have been modified and
shall be maintained by the German Government in conformity with this Part
of the present Treaty.
Within the same period all the administrative or other measures relating
to the execution of this Part of the Treaty must have been taken.
ARTICLE

212

The following portions of the Armistice of November 11, 1918: Article
VI, the first two and the sixth and seventh paragraphs of Article VII; Article
IX; Clauses I, II and V of Annex nO 2, and the Protocol, dated April 4,
1919/° supplementing the Armistice of November 11, 1918, remain in force
so far as they are not inconsistent with the above stipulations.
ARTICLE

213

So long as the present Treaty remains in force, Germany undertakes to
give every facility for any investigation which the Council of the League of
Nations, acting if need be by a majority vote, may consider necessary.
20

Ante, p. 30.

134

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

PART VI
PRISONERS OF WAR AND GRAVES
SECTION I

Prisoners of War
ARTICLE

214

The repatriation of prisoners of war and interned civilians shall take place
as soon as possible after the coming into force of the present Treaty and shall
be carried out with the greatest rapidity.
ARTICLE

215

The repatriation of German prisoners of war and interned civilians shall,
in accordance with Article 214, be carried out by a Commission composed
of representatives of the Allied and Associated Powers on the one part and
of the German Government on the other part.
For each of the Allied and Associated Powers a Sub-Commission, composed
exclusively of Representatives of the interested Power and of Delegates of the
German Government, shall regulate the details of carrying into effect the
repatriation of the prisoners of war.
ARTICLE

216

From the time of their delivery into the hands of the German authorities
the prisoners of war and interned civilians are to be returned without delay
to their homes by the said authorities.
Those amongst them who before the war were habitually resident in territory occupied by the troops of the Allied and Associated Powers are likewise
to be sent to their homes, subject to the consent and control of the military
authorities of the Allied and Associated armies of occupation.
ARTICLE

217

The whole cost of repatriation from the moment of starting shall be borne
by the German Government who shall also provide the land and sea transport
and staff considered necessary by the Commission referred to in Article 215.
ARTICLE

218

Prisoners of war and interned civilians awaiting disposal or undergoing
sentence for offences against discipline shall be repatriated irrespective of the
completion of their sentence or of the proceedings pending against them.
This stipulation shall not apply to prisoners of war and interned civilians
punished for offences committed subsequent to May 1,1919.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

135

During the period pending their repatriation all prisoners of war and
interned civilians shall remain subject to the existing regulations, more especially as regards work and discipline.
ARTICLE

219

Prisoners of war and interned civilians who are awaiting disposal or undergoing sentence for offences other than those against discipline may be detained.
ARTICLE

220

The German Government undertakes to admit to its territory without distinction all persons liable to repatriation.
Prisoners of war or other German nationals who do not desire to be
repatriated may be excluded from repatriation; but the Allied and Associated
Governments reserve to themselves the right either to repatriate them or to
take them to a neutral country or to allow them to reside in their own
territories.
The German Government undertakes not to institute any exceptional
proceedings against these persons or their families nor to take any repressive or
vexatious measures of any kind whatsoever against them on tm" account.
ARTICLE

221

The Allied and Associated Governments reserve the right to make the
repatriation of German prisoners of war or German nationals in their hands
conditional upon the immediate notification and release by the German Government of any prisoners of war who are nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers and may still be in Germany.
ARTICLE

222

Germany undertakes:
(1) To give every facility to Commissions to enquire into the cases of those
who cannot be traced; to furnish such Commissions with all necessary means
of transport; to allow them access to camps, prisons, hospitals and all other
places; and to place at their disposal all documents, whether public or private,
which would facilitate their enquiries;
(2) To impose penalties upon any German officials or private persons who
have concealed the presence of any nationals of any of the Allied and Associated Powers or have neglected to reveal the presence of any such after it had
come to their knowledge.
ARTICLE

223

Germany undertakes to restore without delay from the date of the coming
into force of the present Treaty all articles, money, securities and documents
which have belonged to nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers and
which have been retained by the German authorities.

136

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

224

The High Contracting Parties waive reciprocally all repayment of sums
due for the maintenance of prisoners of war in their respective territories.
SECTION II

Graves
ARTICLE

225

The Allied and Associated Governments and the German Government
will cause to be respected and maintained the graves of the soldiers and
sailors buried in their respective territories.
They agree to recognise any Commission appointed by an Allied or Associated Government for the purpose of identifying, registering, caring for
or erecting suitable memorials over the said graves and to facilitate the discharge of its duties.
Furthermore they agree to afford, so far as the provisions of their laws
and the requirements of public health allow, every facility for giving effect
to requests that the bodies of their soldiers and sailors may be transferred
to their own country.
ARTICLE 226
The graves of prisoners of war and interned civilians who are nationals
of the different belligerent States and have died in captivity shall be properly
maintained in accordance with Article 225 of the present Treaty.
The Allied and Associated Governments on the one part and the German
Government on the other part reciprocally undertake also to furnish to each
other:
( 1) A complete list of those who have died, together with all infonnation
useful for identification;
(2) All infonnation as to the number and position of the graves of all those
who have been buried without identification.
PART VII
PENALTIES
ARTICLE

227

The'Allied and Associated Powers publicly arraign William II of Hohenzollern, formerly German Emperor, for a supreme offence against international morality and the sanctity of treaties.
A special tribunal will be constituted to try the accused, thereby assuring
him the guarantees essential to the right of defence. It will be composed of
five judges, one appointed by each of the following Powers: namely, the
United States of America, Great Britain, France, Italy and Japan.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

137

In its decision the tribunal will be guided by the highest motives of international policy, with a view to vindicating the solemn obligations of international undertakings and the validity of international morality. It will be
its duty to fix the punishment which it considers should be imposed.
The Allied and Associated Powers will address a request to the Government of the Netherlands for the surrender to them of the ex-Emperor in
order that he may be put on trial.
ARTICLE

228

The German Government recognises the right of the Allied and Associated
Powers to bring before military tribunals persons accused of having committed
acts in violation of the laws and customs of war. Such persons shall, if found
guilty, be sentenced to punishments laid down by law. This provision will
apply notwithstanding any proceedings or prosecution before a tribunal in
Germany or in the territory of her allies.
The German Government shall hand over to the Allied and Associated
Powers, or to such one of them as shall so request, all persons accused
of having committed an act in violation of the laws and customs of war,
who are specified either by name or by the rank, office or employment which
they held under the German authorities.
ARTICLE

229

Persons guilty of criminal acts against the nationals of one of the Allied
and Associated Powers will be brought before the military tribunals of that
Power.
Persons guilty of criminal acts against the nationals of more than one
of the Allied and Associated Powers will be brought before military tribunals
composed of members of the military tribunals of the powers concerned.
In every case the accused will be entitled to name his own counsel.
ARTICLE

230

The German Government undertakes to furnish all documents and information of every kind, the production of which may be considered necessary to ensure the full knowledge of the incriminating acts, the discovery
of offenders and the just appreciation of responsibility.
PART VIII

REPARATION
SECTION I

General Provisions
ARTICLE

231

The Allied and Associated Governments affirm and Germany accepts
the responsibility of Germany and her allies for causing all the loss and

138

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals
have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by
the aggression of Germany and her allies.
ARTICLE 232
The Allied and Associated Governments recognize that the resources of
Germany are not adequate, after taking into account permanent diminutions
of such resources which will result from other provisions of the present Treaty,
to make complete reparation for all such loss and damage.
The Allied and Associated Governments, however, require, and Germany
undertakes, that she will make compensation for all damage done to the
civilian population of the Allied and Associated Powers and to their property
during the period of the belligerency of each as an Allied or Associated
Power against Germany by such aggression by land, by sea and from the
air, and in general all damage as defined in Annex I hereto.
In accordance with Germany's pledges, already given, as to complete
restoration for Belgium, Germany undertakes, in addition to the compensation for damage elsewhere in this Part provided for, as a consequence of the
violation of the Treaty of 1839, to make reimbursement of all sums which
Belgium has borrowed from the Allied and Associated Governments up to
November 11, 1918, together with interest at the rate of five per cent. (5%)
per annum on such sums. This amount shall be determined by the Reparation Commission, and the German Government undertakes thereupon
forthwith to make a special issue of bearer bonds to an equivalent amount
payable in marks gold, on May 1, 1926, or, at the option of the German
Government, on the 1st of May in any year up to 1926. Subject to the
foregoing, the form of such bonds shall be determined by the Reparation
Commission. Such bonds shall be handed over to the Reparation Commission, which has authority to take and acknowledge receipt thereof on
behalf of Belgium.
ARTICLE 233
The amount of the above damage for which compensation is to be made
by Germany shall be determined by an Inter-Allied Commission, to be
called the Reparation Commission and constituted in the form and with
the powers set forth hereunder and in Annexes II to VII inclusive hereto.
This Commission shall consider the claims and give to the German Government a just opportunity to be heard.
The findings of the Commission as to the amount of damage defined
as above shall be concluded and notified to the German Government on or
before May 1, 1921, as representing the extent of that Government's
obligations.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

139

The Commission shall concurrently draw up a schedule of payments
prescribing the time and manner for securing and discharging the entire
obligation within a period of thirty years from May 1, 1921. If, however,
within the period mentioned, Germany fails to discharge her obligations, any
balance remaining unpaid may, within the discretion of the Commission, be
postponed for settlement in subsequent years, or may be handled otherwise
in such manner as the Allied and Associated Governments, acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Part of the present Treaty,
shall determine.
ARTICLE 234
The Reparation Commission shall after May 1, 1921, from time to time,
consider the resources and capacity of Germany, and, after giving her representatives a just .opportunity to be heard, shall have discretion to extend
the date, and to modify the form of payments, such as are to be provided
for in accordance with Article 233; but not to cancel any part, except with
the specific authority of the several Governments represented upon the
Commission.
ARTICLE 235
In order to enable the Allied and Associated Powers to proceed at once
to the restoration of their industrial and economic life, pending the full
determination of their claims, Germany shall pay in such instalments and
in such manner (whether in gold, commodities, ships, securities or otherwise)
as the Reparation Commission may fix, during 1919, 1920 and the first
four months of 1921, the equivalent of 20,000,000,000 gold marks. Out
of this sum the expenses of the armies of occupation subsequent to the
Armistice of November J 1, 1918, shall first be met, and such supplies of
food and raw materials as may be judged by the Governments of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers to be essential to enable Germany to
meet her obligations for reparation may also, with the approval of the said
Governments, be paid for out of the above sum. The balance shall be
reckoned towards liquidation of the amounts due for reparation. Germany
shall further deposit bonds as prescribed in paragraph 12 (c) of Annex II
hereto.
ARTICLE 236
Germany further agrees to the direct application of her economic resources
to reparation as specified in Annexes III, IV, V, and VI, relating respectively to merchant shipping, to physical restoration, to coal and derivatives
of coal, and to dyestuffs and other chemical products; provided always that
the value of the property transferred and any services rendered by her under
these Annexes, assessed in the manner therein prescribed, shall be credited
to her towards liquidation of her obligations under the above Articles.

140

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

237

The successive instalments, including the above sum, paid over by Germany in satisfaction of the above claims will be divided by the Allied and
Associated Governments in proportions which have been determined upon
by them in advance on a basis of general equity and of the rights of each.
For the purposes of this division the value of property transferred and
services rendered under Article 243, and under Annexes III, IV, V, VI, and
VII, shall be reckoned in the same manner as cash payments effected in that
year.
ARTICLE 238
In addition to the payments mentioned above Germany shall effect, in
accordance with the procedure laid down by the Reparation Commission,
restitution in cash of cash taken away, seized or sequestrated, and also restitution of animals, objects of every nature and securities taken away, seized or
sequestrated, in the cases in which it proves possible to identify them in territory belonging to Germany or her allies.
Until this procedure is laid down, restitution will continue in accordance
with the provisions of the Armistice of November 11, 1918, and its renewals
and the Protocols thereto.
ARTICLE 239
The German Government undertakes to make forthwith the restitution
contemplated by Article 238 and to make the payments and deliveries contemplated by Articles 233, 234, 235 and 236.
ARTICLE

240

The German Government recognizes the Commission provided for by
Article 233 as the same may be constituted by the Allied and Associated Governments in accordance with Annex II, and agrees irrevocably to the possession and exercise by such Commission of the power and authority given to
it under the present Treaty.
The German Government will supply to the Commission all the information which the Commission may require relative to the financial situation
and operations and to the property, productive capacity, and stocks and
current production of raw materials and manufactured articles of Germany
and her nationals, and further any information relative to military operations
which in the judgment of the Commission may be necessary for the assessment of Germany's liability for reparation as defined in Annex r.
The German Government will accord to the members of the Commission and its authorised agents the same rights and immunities as are enjoyed
in Germany by duly accredited diplomatic agents of friendly Powers.
Germany further agrees to provide for the salaries and expenses of the
Commission and of such staff as it may employ.

(
'\

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

141

241

Germany undertakes to pass, issue and maintain in force any legislation,
orders and decrees that may be necessary to give complete effect to these
provisions.
ARTICLE 242
The provisions of this Part of the present Treaty do not apply to the
property, rights and interests referred to in Sections III and IV of Part X
(Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty, nor to the product of their
liquidation, except so far as concerns any final balance in favour of Germany
under Article 243 (a).
ARTICLE 243
The following shall be reckoned as credits to Germany in respect of her
reparation obligations:
(a) Any final balance in favour of Germany under Section V (AlsaceLorraine) of Part III (Political Clauses for Europe) and Sections III and
IV of Part X (Economic Clauses) of the present Treaty;
(b) Amounts due to Germany in respect of transfers under Section IV
(Saar Basin) of Part III (Political Clauses for Europe), Part IX (Financial
Clauses), and Part XII (Ports, Waterways and Railways) ;
(c) Amounts which in the judgment of the Reparation Commission
should be credited to Germany on account of any other transfers under the
present Treaty of property, rights, concessions or other interests.
In no case however shall credit be given for property restored in accordance
with Article 238 of the present Part.
ARTICLE

244

The transfer of the German submarine cables which do not form the subject of particular provisions of the present Treaty is regulated by Annex
VII hereto.
ANNEX I
Compensation may be claimed from Germany under Article 232 above in
respect of the total damage under the following categories:
(I) Damage to injured persons and to surviving dependents by personal
injury to or death of civilians caused by acts of war, including bombardments or other attacks on land, on sea, or from the air, and all the direct
consequences thereof, and of all operations of war by the two groups of
belligerents wherever arising.
( 2 ) Damage caused by Germany or her allies to civilian victims of acts
of cruelty, violence or maltreatment (including injuries to life or health
as a consequence of imprisonment, deportation, internment or evacuation, of

142

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

exposure at sea or of being forced to labour), wherever arising, and to the
surviving dependents of such victims.
(3) Damage caused by Germany or her allies in their own territory or in
occupied or invaded territory to civilian victims of all acts injurious to health
or capacity to work, or to honour, as well as the surviving dependents of
such victims.
(4) Damage caused by any kind of maltreatment of prisoners of war.
(5) As damage caused to the peoples of the Allied and Associated Powers,
all pensions and compensation in the nature of pensions to naval and military
victims of war (including members of the air force), whether mutilated,
wounded, sick or invalided, and to the dependents of such victims, the
amount due to the Allied and Associated Governments being calculated for
each of them as being the capitalised cost of such pensions and compensation
at the date of the coming into force of the present Treaty on the basis of the
scales in force in France at such date.
(6) The cost of assistance by the Governments of the Allied and Associated Powers to prisoners of war and to their families and dependents.
(7) Allowances by the Governments of the Allied and Associated Powers
to the families and dependents of mobilised persons or persons serving with
the forces, the amount due to them for each calendar year in which hostilities
occurred being calculated for each Government on the basis of the average
scale for such payments in force in France during that year.
(8) Damage caused to civilians by being forced by Germ any or her allies
to labour without just remuneration.
(9) Damage in respect of all property wherever situated belonging to any
of the Allied or Associated States or their nationals, with the exception of
naval and military works or materials, which has been carried off, seized, injured or destroyed by the acts of Germany or her allies on land, on sea or from
the air, or damage directly in consequence of hostilities or of any operations
of war.
( 10) Damage in the form of levies, fines and other similar exactions imposed by Germany or her allies upon the civilian population.
ANNEX II

1
The Commission referred to in Article 233 shall be called "The Reparation Commission" and is hereinafter referred to as "the Commission".

2
Delegates to this Commission shall be nominated by the United States of
America, Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan, Belgium and the Serb-CroatSlovene State. Each of these Powers will appoint one Delegate and also one
Assistant Delegate, who will take his place in case of illness or necessary

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

143

absence, but at other times will only have the right to be present at proceedings without taking any part therein.
On no occasion shall the Delegates of more than five of the above Powers
have the right to take part in the proceedings of the Commission and to record
their votes. The Delegates of the United States, Great Britain, France and
Italy shall have this right on all occasions. The Delegate of Belgium shall have
this right on all occasions other than those referred to below. The Delegate of
Japan shall have this right on occasions when questions relating to damage at
sea, and questions arising under Article 260 of Part IX (Financial Clauses)
in which Japanese interests are concerned, are under consideration. The Delegate of the Serb-Croat-Slovene State shall have this right when questions
relating to Austria, Hungary or Bulgaria are under consideration.
Each Government represented on the Commission shall have the right to
withdraw therefrom upon twelve months notice filed with the Commission
and confirmed in the course of the sixth month after the date of the original
notice.
3
Such of the other Allied and Associated Powers as may be interested shall
have the right to appoint a Delegate to be present and act as Assessor only
while their respective claims and interests are under examination or discussion, but without the right to vote.
4
In case of the death, resignation or recall of any Delegate, Assistant Delegate or Assessor, a successor to him shall be nominated as soon as possible.

5
The Commission will have its principal permanent Bureau in Paris and
will hold its first meeting in Paris as soon as practicable after the coming into
force of the present Treaty, and thereafter will meet in such place or places
and at such time as it may deem convenient and as may be necessary for the
most expeditious discharge of its duties.
6
At its first meeting the Commission shall elect, from among the Delegates
referred to above, a Chairman and a Vice~Chairman, who shall hold office for
one year and shall be eligible for re-election. If a vacancy in the Chairmanship or Vice-Chairmanship should occur during. the annual period, the Commission shall proceed to a new election for the remainder of the said period.

7
The Commission is authorised to appoint all necessary officers, agents and
employees who may be required for the execution of its functions, and to fix
their remuneration; to constitute committees, whose members need not neces-

144

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

sarily be members of the Commission, and to take all executive steps necessary
for the purpose of discharging its duties; and to delegate authority and discretion to officers, agents and committees.

8
All proceedings of the Commission shall be private, unless, on particular
occasions, the Commission shall otherwise determine for special reasons.

9
The Commission shall be required, if the German Government so desire, to
hear, within a period which it will fix from time to time, evidence and arguments on the part of Germany on any question connected with her capacity
to pay.
10
The Commission shall consider the claims and give to the German Government a just opportunity to be heard, but not to take any part whatever in the
decisions of the Commission. The Commission shall afford a similar opportunity to the allies of Germany, when it shall consider that their interests are in
question.
11
The Commission shall not be bound by any particular code or rules of law
or by any particular rule of evidence or of procedure, but shall be guided by
justice, equity and good faith. Its decisions must follow the same principles
and rules in all cases where they are applicable. It will establish rules relating
to methods of proof of claims. It may act on any trustworthy modes of
computation.
12
The Commission shall have all the powers conferred upon it, and shall
exercise all the functions assigned to it, by the present Treaty.
The Commission shall in general have wide latitude as to its control
and handling of the whole reparation problem as dealt with in this Part
of the present Treaty and shall have authority to interpret its provisions.
Subject to the provisions of the present Treaty, the Commission is constituted
by the several Allied and Associated Governments referred to in paragraphs
2 and 3 above as the exclusive agency of the said Governments respectively
for receiving, selling, holding, and distributing the reparation payments to
be made by Germany under this Part of the present Treaty. The Commission
must comply with the following conditions and provisions:
(a) Whatever part of the full amount of the proved claims is not paid in
gold, or in ships, securities and commodities or otherwise, Germany shall
be required, under such conditions as the Commission may determine, to
cover by way of guarantee by an equivalent issue of bonds, obligations or

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

145

otherwise, in order to constitute an acknowledgment of the said part of the
debt.
(b) In periodically estimating Germany's capacity to pay, the Commission shall examine the German system of taxation, first, to the end that the
sums for reparation which Germany is required to pay shall become a charge
upon all her revenues prior to that for the service or discharge of any domestic
loan, and secondly, so as to satisfy itself that, in general, the German scheme
of taxation is fully as heavy proportionately as that of any of the Powers
represented on the Commission.
(c) In order to facilitate and continue the immediate restoration of the
economic life of the Allied and Associated countries, the Commission will as
provided in Article 235 take from Germany by way of security for and acknowledgment of her debt a first instalment of gold bearer bonds free of
all taxes and charges of every description estaqlished or to be established by
the Government of the German Empire or of the German States, or by any
authority subject to them; these bonds will be delivered on account and in
three portions, the marks gold being payable in conformity with Article 262 of
Part IX (Financial Clauses) of the present Treaty as follows:
( 1) To be issued forthwith, 20,000,000,000 Marks gold bearer bonds,
payable not later than May 1, 1921, without interest. There shall be specially
applied towards the amortisation of these bonds the payments which Germany
is pledged to make in conformity with Article 235, after deduction of the
sums used for the reimbursement of expenses of the armies of occupation
and for payment of foodstuffs and raw materials. Such bonds as have not
been redeemed by May 1, 1921, shall then be exchanged for new bonds of
the same type as those provided for below (paragraph 12, c, (2) ).
(2) To be issued forthwith, further 40,000,000,000 Marks gold bearer
bonds, bearing interest at 2~ per cent. per annum between 1921 and 1926,
and thereafter at 5 per cent. per annum with an additional 1 per cent. for
amortisation beginning in 1926 on the whole amount of the issue.
(3) To be delivered forthwith a covering undertaking in writing to
issue when, but not until, the Commission is satisfied that Germany can
meet such interest and sinking fund obligations, a further instalment of
40,000,000,000 Marks gold 5 per cent. bearer bonds, the time and mode of
payment of principal and interest to be determined by the Commission.
The dates for payment of interest, the manner of applying the amortisation fund, and all other questions relating to the issue, management an.d
regulation of the bond issue shall be determined by the Commission from
time to time.
Further issues by way of acknowledgment and security may be required as
the Commission subsequently determines from time to time.
(d) In the event of bonds, obligations or other evidence of indebtedness
issued by Germany by way of security for or acknowledgment of her repara-

146

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

tion debt being disposed of outright, not by way of pledge, to persons other
than the several Governments in whose favour Germany's original reparation
indebtedness was created, an amount of such reparation indebtedness shall
be deemed to be extinguished corresponding to the nominal value of the
bonds, etc., so disposed of outright, and the obligation of Germany in respect
of such bonds shall be confined to her liabilities to the holders of the bonds,
as expressed upon their face.
(e) The damage for repairing, reconstructing and rebuilding property
in the invaded and devastated districts, including reinstallation of furniture,
machinery and other equipment, will be calculated according to the cost at
the dates when the work is done.
(I) Decisions of the Commission relating to the total or partial cancellation of the capital or interest of any verified debt of Germany must be
accompanied by a statement !Jf its reasons.
13
As to voting, the Commission will observe the following rules:
When a decision of the Commission is taken, the votes of all the Delegates
entitled to vote, or in the absence of any of them, of their Assistant Delegates,
shall be recorded. Abstention from voting is to be treated as a vote against
the proposal under discussion. Assessors have no vote.
On the following questions unanimity is necessary:
(a) Questions involving the sovereignty of any of the Allied and Associated Powers, or the cancellation of the whole or any part of the debt or
obligations of Germany;
(b) Questions of determining the amount and conditions of bonds or other
obligations to be issued by the German Government and of fixing the time
and manner for selling, negotiating or distributing such bonds;
(c) Any postponement, total or partial, beyond the end of 1930, of the
payment of instalments falling due between May 1, 1921, and the end of 1926
inclusive;
(d) Any postponement, total or partial, of any instalment falling due after
1926 for a period exceeding three years;
.
(e) Questions of applying in any particular case a method of measuring
damages different from that which has been previously applied in a similar
case;
(I) Questions of the interpretation of the provisions of this Part of the
present Treaty.

All other questions shall be decided by the vote of a majority.
In case of any difference of opinion among the Delegates, which cannot
be solved by reference to their Governments, upon the question whether a
given case is one which requires a unanimous vote for its decision or not,
such difference shall be referred to the immediate arbitration of some im-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

147

partial person to be agreed upon by their Governments, whose award the
Allied and Associated Governments agree to accept.
14

Decisions of the Commission, in accordance with the powers conferred
upon it, shall forthwith become binding and may be put into immediate
execution without further proceedings.
15

The Commission will issue to each of the interested Powers, in such form
as the Commission shall fix:
( 1) A certificate stating that it holds for the account of the said Power
bonds of the issues mentioned above, the said certificate, on the demand of
the Power concerned, being divisible in a number of parts not exceeding
five;
(2) From time to time certificates stating the goods delivered by Germany
on account of her reparation debt which it holds for the account of the said
Power.
The said certificates shall be registered, and upon notice to the Commission, may be transferred by endorsement.
When bonds are issued for sale or negotiation, and when goods are delivered by the Commission, certificates to an equivalent value must be withdrawn.
16
Interest shall be debited to Germany as from May 1, 1921, in respect of
her debt as determined by the Commission, after allowing for sums already
covered by cash payments or their equivalent, or by bonds issued to the Commission, or under Article 243. The rate of interest shall be 5 per cent. unless
the Commission shall determine at some future time that circumstances
justify a variation of this rate.
The Commission, in fixing on May 1, 1921, the total amount of the debt
of Germany, may take account of interest due on sums arising out of the
reparation of material damage as from November 11, 1918, up to May 1,
1921.

17
In case of default by Germany in the performance of any obligation under
this Part of the present Treaty, the Commission wiil forthwith give notice
of such default to each of the interested Powers and ~ay make such recommendations as to the action to be taken in consequence of such default as it
may think necessary.

148

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

18
The measures which the Allied and Associated Powers shall have the right
to take, in case of voluntary default by Germany, and which Germany agrees
not to regard as acts of war, may include economic and financial prohibitions
and reprisals and in general such other measures as the respective Governments may determine to be necessary in the circumstances.

19
Payments required to be made in gold or its equivalent on account of the
proved claims of the Allied and Associated Powers may at any time be
accepted by the Commission in the form of chattels, properties, commodities,
businesses, rights, concessions, within or without German territory, ships,
bonds, shares or securities of any kind, or currencies of Germany or other
States, the value of such substitutes for gold being fixed at a fair and just
amount by the Commission itself.

20
The Commission, in fixing or accepting payment in specified properties or
rights, shall have due regard for any legal or equitable interests of the Allied
and Associated Powers or of neutral Powers or of their nationals therein.

21
No member of the Commission shall be responsible, except to the Government appointing him, for any action or omission as such member. No one of
the Allied or Associated Governments assumes any responsibility in respect
of any other Government.

22
Subject to the provisions of the present Treaty this Annex may be amended
by the unanimous decision of the Governments represented from time to time
upon the Commission.

23
When all the amounts due from Germany and her allies under the present
Treaty or the decisions of the Commission have been discharged and all
sums received, or their equivalents, shall have been distributed to the Powers
interested, the Commission shall be dissolved.
ANNEX III

1
Germany recognises the right of the Allied and Associated Powers to the
replacement, ton for ton (gross tonnage) and class for class, of all merchant
ships and fishing boats lost or damaged owing to the war.
Nevertheless, and in spite of the fact that the tonnage of German shipping
at present in existence is much less than that lost by the Allied and Associated

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

149

Powers in consequence of the Gennan aggression, the right thus recognised
will be enforced on Gennan ships and boats under the following conditions :
The German Government, on behalf of themselves and so as to bind
all other persons interested, cede to the Allied and Associated Governments
the property in all the German merchant ships which are of 1,600 tons gross
and upwards; in one-half, reckoned in tonnage, of the ships which are between 1,000 tons and 1,600 tons gross; in one-quarter, reckoned in tonnage,
of the steam trawlers; and in one-quarter, reckoned in tonnage, of the other
fishing boats.

2
The German Government will, within two months of the coming into
force of the present Treaty, deliver to the Reparation Commission all the
ships and boats mentioned in paragraph 1.

3
The ships and boats mentioned in paragraph 1 include all ships and boats
which (a) fly, or may be entitled to fly, the German merchant flag; or (b)
are owned by any Gennan national, company or corporation or by any company or corporation belonging to a country other than an Allied or Associated
country and under the control or direction of Gennan nationals; or (c) are
now under construction (1) in Gennany, (2) in other than Allied or Associated countries for the account of any Gennan national, company or
corporation.
4

For the purpose of providing documents of title for the ships and boats to be
handed over as above mentioned, the German Government will:
( a ) Deliver to the. Reparation Commission in respect of each vessel a bill
of sale or other document of title evidencing the transfer to the Commission
of the entire property in the vessel, free from all encumbrances, charges and
liens of all kinds, as the Commission may require;
( b) Take all measures that may be indicated by the Reparation Commission for ensuring that the ships themselves shall be placed at its disposal.

5
As an additional part of reparation, Germany agrees to cause merchant
ships to be built in Gennan yards for the account of the Allied and Associated
Governments as follows:
(a) Within three months of the coming into force of the present Treaty,
the Reparation Commission will notify to the Gennan Government the
amount of tonnage to be laid down in German shipyards in each of the two
years next succeeding the three months mentioned above.
(b) Within two years of the coming into force of the present Treaty the
Reparation Commission will notify to the Gennan Government the amount

150

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

of tonnage to be laid down in each of the three years following the two years
mentioned above.
(c) The amount of tonnage to be laid down in each year shall not exceed
200,000 tons, gross tonnage.
(d) The specifications of the ships to be built, the conditions under which
they are to be built and delivered, the price per ton at which they are to be
accounted for by the Reparation Commission, and all other questions relating to the accounting, ordering, building and delivery of the ships, shall be
determined by the Commission.
6
Germany undertakes to restore in kind and in normal condition of upkeep
to the Allied and Associated Powers, within two months of the coming into
force of the present Treaty, in accordance with procedure to be laid down
by the Reparation Commission, any boats and other movable appliances
belonging to inland navigation which since August 1, 1914, have by any
means whatever come into her possession or into the possession of her nationals, and which can be identified.
With a view to make good the loss in inland navigation tonnage, from
whatever cause arising, which has been incurred during the war by the Allied
and Associated Powers, and which cannot be made good by means of the
restitution prescribed above, Germany agrees to cede to the Reparation
Commission a portion of the German river fleet up to the amount of the
loss mentioned above, provided that such cession shall not exceed 20 per
cent of the river fleet as it existed on November 11, 1918.
The conditions of this cession shall be settled by the arbitrators referred to
in Article 339 of Part XII (Ports, Waterways and Railways) of the present
Treaty, who are charged with the settlement of difficulties relating to the
apportionment of river tonnage resulting from the new international regime
applicable to certain river systems or from the territorial changes affecting
those systems.

7
Germany agrees to take any measures that may be indicated to her by the
Reparation Commission for obtaining the full title to the property in all
ships which have during the war been transferred, or are in process of transfer, to neutral flags, without the consent of the Allied and Associated
Governments.
8
Germany waives all claims of any description against the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals in respect of the detention, employment, loss or damage of any German ships or boats, exception being made
of payments due in respect of the employment of ships in confonnity with

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

151

the Armistice Agreement of January 13 [16J, 1919/1 and subsequent
Agreements.
The handing over of the ships of the German mercantile marine must
be continued without interruption in accordance with the said Agreement.
9

Germany waives all claims to vessels or cargoes sunk by or in consequence
of naval action and subsequently salved, in which any of the Allied or Associated Governments or their nationals may have any interest either as owners,
charterers, insurers or otherwise, notwithstanding any decree of condemnation which may have been made by a Prize Court of Germany or of her
allies.
ANNEX IV
1
The Allied and Associated Powers require, and Germany undertakes,
that in part satisfaction of her obligations expressed in the present Part she
will, as hereinafter provided, devote her economic resources directly to the
physical restoration of the invaded areas of the Allied and Associated Powers,
to the extent that these Powers may determine.

2
The Allied and Associated Governments may file with the Reparation
Commission lists showing:
(a) Animals, machinery, equipment,'tools and like articles of a commercial character, which have been seized, consumed or destroyed by Germany
or destroyed in direct consequence of military operations, and which such
Governments, for the purpose of meeting immediate and urgent needs,
desire to have replaced by animals and articles of the same nature which are
in being in German territory at the date of the coming into force of the
present Treaty;
( b) Reconstruction materials (stones, bricks, refractory bricks, tiles, wood,
window-glass, steel, lime, cement, etc.), machinery, heating apparatus, furniture and like articles of a commercial character which the said Governments desire to have produced and manufactured in Germany and delivered
to them to permit of the restoration of the invaded areas.

3
The lists relating to the articles mentioned in 2 (a) above shall be filed
within sixty days after the date of the coming into force of the present
Treaty.
21

Ante, p. 24.

152

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

The lists relating to the articles in 2 (b) above shall be filed on or before
December 31, 1919.
The lists shall contain all such details as are customary in commercial
contracts dealing with the subject matter, including specifications, dates of
delivery (but not extending over more than four years), and places of delivery, but" not price or value, which shall be fixed as hereinafter provided
by the Commission.
4

Immediately upon the filing of such lists with the Commission, the Commission shall consider the amount and number of the materials and animals
mentioned in the lists provided for above which are to be required of Germany. In reaching a decision on this matter the Commission shall take into
account such domestic requirements of Germany as it deems essential for
the maintenance of Germany's social and economic life, the prices and dates
at which similar articles can be obtained in the Allied and Associated countries as compared with those to be fixed for German articles, and the general
interest of the Allied and A'Jsociated Governments that the industrial life
of Germany be not so disorganised as to affect adversely the ability of Germany to perform the other acts of reparation stipulated for.
Machinery, equipment, tools and like articles of a commercial character
in actual industrial use are not, however, to be demanded of Germany
unless there is no free stock of such articles respectively which is not in use
and is available, and then not in excess of thirty per cent. of the quantity
of such articles in use in anyone establishment or undertaking.
The Commission shall give representatives of the German Government
an opportunity and a time to be heard as to their capacity to furnish the
said materials, articles and animals.
The decision of the Commission shall thereupon and at the earliest possible
moment be communicated to the German Government and to the several
interested Allied and Associated Governments.
The German Government undertakes to deliver the materials, articles and
animals as specified in the said communication, and the interested Allied and
Associated Governments severally agree to accept the same, provided they
conform to the specification given, or are not, in the judgment of the Commission, unfit to be utilized in the work of reparation.

5
The Commission shall determine the value to be attributed to the materials,
articles and animals to be delivered in accordance with the foregoing, and the
Allied or Associated Power receiving the same agrees to be charged with such
value, and the amount thereof shall be treated as a payment by Germany
to be divided in accordance with Article 237 of this Part of the present Treaty.
In cases where the right to require physical restoration as above provided

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

153

is exercised, the Commission shall ensure that the amount to be credited
against the reparation obligation of Germany shall be the fair value of work
done or materials supplied by Germany, and that the claim made by the interested Power in respect of the damage so repaired by physical restoration shall
be discharged to the extent of the proportion which the damage thus repaired
bears to the whole of the damage thus claimed for.

6
As an immediate advance on account of the animals referred to in paragraph 2 (a) above, Germany undertakes to deliver in equal monthly instalments in the three months following the coming into force of the present
Treaty the following quantities of live stock:
(1) To the French Government
500 stallions (3 to 7 years) ;
30,000 fillies and mares (18 months to 7 years), type: Ardennais, Boulonnais or
Belgian;
2,000 bulls (18 months to 3 years);
90,000 milch cows (2 to 6 years);
1,000 rams;
100,000 sheep;
10,000 goats.
(2) To the Belgian Government
200 stallions (3 to 7 years), large Belgian type;
5,000 mares (3 to 7 years), large Belgian type;
5,000 fillies (18 months to 3 years), large Belgian type;
2,000 bulls (18 months to 3 years) ;
50,000 milch cows (2 to 6 years) ;
40,000 heifers;
200 rams;
20,000 sheep;
15,000 sows.

The animals delivered shall be of average health and condition.
To the extent that animals so delivered cannot be identified as animals
taken away or seized, the value of such animals shall be credited against the
reparation obligations of Germany in accordance with paragraph 5 of this
Annex.

7
Without waiting for the decisions of the Commission referred to in paragraph 4 of this Annex to be taken, Germany must continue the delivery to
France of the agricultural material referred to in Article III of the renewal
dated January 16,1919, of the Armistice.
ANNEX V

1
Germany accords the following options for the delivery of coal and derivatives of coal to the undermentioned signatories of the present Treaty.

154

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

2
Germany undertakes to deliver to France seven million tons of coal per
year for ten years. In addition, Germany undertakes to deliver to France annually for a period not exceeding ten years an amount of coal equal to the
difference between the annual production before the war of the coal mines of
the Nord and Pas de Calais, destroyed as a result of the war, and the production of the mines of the same area during the years in question: such delivery
not to exceed twenty million tons in anyone year of the first five years, and
eight million tons in anyone year of the succeeding five years.
It is understood that due diligence will be exercised in the restoration of the
destroyed mines in the Nord and the Pas de Calais.

3
Germany undertakes to deliver to Belgium eight million tons of coal
annually for ten years.
4
Germany undertakes to deliver to Italy up to the following quantities
of coal:
July 1919 to June 1920
1920
1921.
1921
1922
1922
1923
1923 1924
and each of the following five years

4% million tons,
6
7>~

8
"}8%
.

At least two-thirds of the actual deliveries to be land-borne.

5
Germany further undertakes to deliver annually to Luxemburg, if directed
by the Reparation Commission, a quantity of coal equal to the pre-war annual consumption of German coal in Luxemburg.
6
The prices to be paid for coal delivered under these options shall be as
follows:
(a) For overland delivery, including delivery by barge, the German
pithead price to German nationals, plus the freight to French, Belgian,
Italian or Luxemburg frontiers, provided that the pithead price does not
exceed the pithead price of British coal for export. In the case of Belgian
bunker coal, the price shall not exceed the Dutch bunker price.
Railroad and barge tariffs shall not be higher than the lowest similar rates
paid in Germany.
(b) For sea delivery, the German export price f. o. b. German ports, or
the British export price f. o. b. British ports, whichever may be lower.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

155

7
The Allied and Associated Governments interested may demand the
delivery, in place of coal, of metallurgical coke in the proportion of 3 tons
of coke to 4 tons of coal.
8
Germany undertakes to deliver to France, and to transport to the French
frontier by rail or by water, the following products, during each of the three
years following the coming into force of this Treaty:
Benzol. . . . . .
Coal tar. . . . .
Sulphate of ammonia.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

35, 000 tons
50, 000 tons
30, 000 tons

All or part of the coal tar may, at the option of the French Government,
be replaced by corresponding quantities of products of distillation, <;uch as
light oils, heavy oils, anthracene, naphthalene or pitch.

9
The price paid for coke and for the articles referred to in the preceding
paragraph shall be the same as the price paid by German nationals under
the same conditions of shipment to the French frontier or to the German
ports, and shall be subject to any advantages which may be accorded
similar products furnished to German nationals.
10

The foregoing options shall be exercised through the intervention of the
Reparation Commission, which, subject to the specific provisions hereof, shall
have power to determine all questions relative to procedure and the qualities
and quantities of products, the quantity of coke which may be substituted
for coal, and the times and modes of delivery and payment. In giving notice
to the German Government of the foregoing options the Commission shall
give at least 120 days' notice of deliveries to be made after January 1, 1920,
and at least 30 days' notice of deliveries to be made between the coming
into force of this Treaty and January 1, 1920. Until Germany has received
the demands referred to in this paragraph, the provisions of the Protocol of
December 25, 1918, (Execution of Article VI of the Armistice of November
11, 1918) remain in force. The notice to be given to the German Government of the exercise of the right of substitution accorded by paragraphs 7
and 8 shall be such as the Reparation Commission may consider sufficient. If
the Commission shall determine that the full exercise of the foregoing options
would interfere unduly with the industrial requirements of Germany, the
Commission is authorised to postpone or to cancel deliveries, and in so doing
to settle all questions of priority; but the coal to replace coal from destroyed
mines shall receive priority over other deliveries.

156

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

ANNEX VI

1
Germany accords to the Reparation Commission an option to require as
part of reparation the delivery by Germany of such quantities and kinds of
dyestuffs and chemical drugs as the Commission may designate, not exceeding 50 per cent. of the total stock of each and every kind of dyestuff and
chemical drug in Germany or under German control at the date of the coming into force of the present Treaty.
This option shall be exercised within sixty days of the receipt by the Commission of such particulars as to stocks as may be considered necessary by
the Commission.

2
Germany further accords to the Reparation Commission an option to
require delivery during the period from the date of the coming into force
of the present Treaty until January 1, 1920, and during each period of six
months thereafter until January 1, 1925, of any specified kind of dyestuff
and chemical drug up to an amount not exceeding 25 per cent. of the German production of such dyestuffs and chemical drugs during the previous
six months period. If in any case the production during such previous six
months was, in the opinion of the Commission, less than normal, the amount
required may be 25 per cent. of the normal production.
Such option shall be exercised within four weeks after the receipt of such
particulars as to production and in such form as may be considered necessary
by the Commission; these particulars shall be furnished by the German
Government immediately after the expiration of each six months period.

3
For dyestuffs and chemical drugs delivered under paragraph 1, the price
shall be fixed by the Commission having regard to pre-war net export prices
and to subsequent increases of cost.
For dyestuffs and chemical drugs delivered under paragraph 2, the price
shall be fixed by the Commission having regard to pre-war net export prices
and subsequent variations of cost, or the lowest net selling price of similar
dyestuffs and chemical drugs to any other purchaser.

4
All details, including mode and times of exercising the options, and making
delivery, and all other questions arising under this arrangement shall be determined by the Reparation Commission; the German Government will furnish
to the Commission all necessary information and other assistance which it
may require.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

157

5
The above expression "dyestuffs and chemical drugs" includes all synthetic
dyes and drugs and intermediate or other products used in connection with
dyeing, so far as they are manufactured for sale. The present arrangement
shall aho apply to cinchona bark and salts of quinine.
ANNEX VII
Germany renounces on her own behalf and on behalf of her nationals in
favour of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers all rights, titles or
privileges of whatever nature in the submarine cables set out below, or m
any portions thereof:
Emden-Vigo: from the Straits of Dover to off Vigo;
Emden-Brest: from off Cherbourg to Brest;
Emden-Teneriffe: from off Dunkirk to off Teneriffe;
Emden-Azores (1) : from the Straits of Dover to Fayal;
Emden-Azores (2) : from the Straits of Dover to Fayal;
Azores-New York (1): from Fayal to New York;
Azores-New York (2) : from Fayal to the longitude of Halifax;
Teneriffe-Monrovia: from off Teneriffe to off Monrovia;
Monrovia-Lome:
lat. :2°30' N.;
from about.
·{ long. : 7°4·0' W. of Greenwich;
lat. :2°20' N.;
to about. .
· { long. :5°30' W. of Greenwich;
lat. :3°48' N.;
and from about
· { long. :0°00',
to Lome;
Lome-Duala: from Lome to Duala;
Monrovia-Pernambuco: from off Monrovia to off Pernambuco;
Constantinople-Constanza: from Constantinople to Constanza;
Yap-Shanghai, Yap-Guam, and Yap-Menado (Celebes); from Yap Island to Shanghai, from Yap Island to Guam Island, and from Yap Island to Menado.

The value of the above mentioned cables or portions thereof in so far as
they are privately owned, calculated on the basis of the original cost less a
suitable allowance for depreciation, shall be credited to Germany in the
reparation account.
SECTION II

Special Provisions
ARTICLE

245

Within six months after the coming into force of the present Treaty the
German Government must restore to the French Government the trophies,
archives, historical souvenirs or works of art carried away from France by
the German authorities in the course of the war of 1870-1871 and during
this last war, in accordance with a list which will be communicated to it by
the French Government; particularly the French flags taken in the course
of the war of 1870-1871 and all the political papers taken by the German
authorities on October 10, 1870, at the chateau of Cerc;ay, near Brunoy

158

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

(Seine-et-Oise) belonging at the time to Mr. Rouher, formerly Minister of
State.
ARTICLE

246

Within six months from the coming into force of the present Treaty,
Germany will restore to His Majesty the King of the Hedjaz the original
Koran of the Caliph Othman, which was removed from Medina by the
Turkish authorities and is stated to have been presented to the ex-Emperor
William II.
Within the same period Germany will hand over to His Britannic Majesty's
Government the skull of the Sultan Mkwawa which was removed from the
Protectorate of German East Africa and taken to Germany.
The delivery of the articles above referred to will be effected in such place
and in such conditions as may be laid down by the Governments to which
they are to be restored.
ARTICLE

247

Germany undertakes to furnish to the University of Louvain, within three
months after a request made by it and transmitted through the intervention
of the Reparation Commission, manuscripts, incunabula, printed books,
maps and objects of collection corresponding in number and value to those
destroyed in the burning by Germany of the Library of Louvain. All
details regarding such replacement will be determined by the Reparation
Commission.
Germany undertakes to deliver to Belgium, through the Reparation Commission, within six months of the coming into force of the present Treaty,
in order to enable Belgium to reconstitute two great artistic works:
(1) The leaves of the triptych of the Mystic Lamb painted by the Van
Eyck brothers, formerly in the Church of St. Bavon at Ghent, now in the
Berlin Museum;
(2) The leaves of the triptych of the Last Supper, painted by Dierick
Bouts, formerly in the Church of St. Peter at Louvain, two of which are
now in the Berlin Museum and two in the Old Pinakothek at Munich.
PART IX

FINANCIAL CLAUSES
ARTICLE

248

Subject to such exceptions as the Reparation Commission may approve,
a first charge upon all the assets and revenues of the German Empire and its
constituent States shall be the cost of reparation and all other costs arising
under the present Treaty or any treaties or agreements supplementary thereto

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

159

or under arrangements concluded between Germany and the Allied and
Associated Powers during the Armistice or its extensions.
Up to May 1, 1921, the German Government shall not export or dispose
of, and shall forbid the export or disposal of, gold without the previous
approval of the Allied and Associated Powers acting through the Reparation
Commission.
ARTICLE 249
There shall be paid by the German Government the total cost of all armies
of the Allied and Associated Governments in occupied German territory
from the date of the signature of the Armistice of November 11, 1918, including the keep of men and beasts, lodging and billeting, pay and allowances,
salaries and wages, bedding, heating, lighting, clothing, equipment, harness
and saddlery, armament and rolling-stock, air services, treatment of sick and
wounded, veterinary and remount services, transport service of all sorts (such
as by rail, sea or river, motor lorries), communications and correspondence,
and in general the cost of all administrative or technical services the working
of which is necessary for the training of troops and for keeping their numbers
up to strength and preserving their military efficiency.
The cost of such liabilities under the above heads so far as they relate to
purchases or requisitions by the Allied and Associated Governments in the
occupied territories shall be paid by the German Government to the Allied
and Associated Governments in marks at the current or agreed rate of exchange. All other of the above costs shall be paid in gold marks.
ARTICLE

250

Germany confirms the surrender of all material handed over to the Allied
and Associated Powers in accordance with the Armistice of November 11,
1918, and subsequent Armistice Agreements, and recognizes the title of the
Allied and Associated Powers to such material.
There shall be credited to the Getman Government, against the sums due
from it to the Allied and Associated Powers for reparation, the value, as
assessed by the Reparation Commission, referred to in Article 233 of Part
VIII (Reparation) of the present Treaty, of the material handed over in
accordance with Article VII of the Armistice of November 11, 1918, or
Article III of the Armistice Agreement of January 16, 1919, as well as of any
other material handed over in accordance with the Armistice of November 11,
1918, and of subsequent Armistice Agreements, for which, as having nonmilitary value, credit should in the judgment of the Reparation Commission be allowed to the German Government.
Property belonging to the Allied and Associated Governments or their
nationals restored or surrendered under the Armistice Agreements in specie
shall not be credited to the German Government.

160

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

251

The priority of the charges established by Article 248 shall, subject to the
qualifications made below, be as follows:
(a) The cost of the armies of occupation as defined under Article 249
during the Armistice and its extensions;
( b) The cost of any armies of occupation as defined under Article 249
after the coming into force of the present Treaty;
(c) The cost of reparation arising out of the present Treaty or any treaties
or conventions supplementary thereto;
(d) The cost of all other obligations incumbent on Germany under the
Armistice Conventions or under this Treaty or any treaties or conventions
supplementary thereto.

The payment for such supplies of food and raw material for Germany
and such other payments as may be judged by the Allied and Associated
Powers to be essential to enable Germany to meet her obligations in respect of
reparation will have priority to the extent and upon the conditions which
have been or may be determined by the Governments of the said Powers.
ARTICLE

252

The right of each of the Allied and Associated Powers to dispose of enemy
assets and property within its jurisdiction at the date of the coming into force
of the present Treaty is not affected by the foregoing provisions.
ARTICLE

253

Nothing in the foregoing provisions shall prejudice in any manner charges
or mortgages lawfully effected in favour of the Allied or Associated Powers
or their nationals respectively, before the date at which a state of war existed
between Germany and the Allied or Associated Power concerned, by the
German Empire or its constituent States, or by German nationals, on assets
in their ownership at that date.
ARTICLE

254

The Powers to which German territory is ceded shall, subject to the qualifications made in Article 255, undertake to pay:
( 1) A portion of the debt of the German Empire as it stood on August
1, 1914, calculated on the basis of the ratio between the average for the three
financial years 1911, 1912, 1913, of such revenues of the ceded territory, and
the average for the same years of such revenues of the whole German Empire
as in the judgment of the Reparation Commission are best calculated to
represent the relative ability of the respective territories to make payment;
(2) A portion of the debt as it stood on August 1, 1914, of the German
State to which the ceded territory belonged, to be determined in accordance
with the principle stated above.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

161

Such portions shall be determined by the Reparation Commission.
The method of discharging the obligation, both in respect of capital and
of interest, so assumed shall be fixed by the Reparation Commission. Such
method may take the form, inter alia, of the assumption by the Power to which
the territory is ceded of Germany's liability for the German debt held by her
nationals. But in the event of the method adopted involving any payments
to the German Government, such payments shall be transferred to the Reparation Commission on account of the sums due for· reparation so long as
any balance in respect of such sums remains unpaid.
ARTICLE

255

(1) As an exception to the above provision and inasmuch as in 1871
Germany refused to undertake any portion of the burden of the French debt;
France shall be, in respect of Alsace-Lorraine, exempt from any payment
under Article 254.
(2) In the case of Poland that portion of the debt which, in the opinion
of the Reparation Commission, is attributable to the measures taken by the
German and Prussian Governments for the German colonisation of Poland
shall be excluded from the apportionment to be made under Article 254.
(3) In the case of all ceded territories other than Alsace-Lorraine, that
portion of the debt of the German Empire or German States which, in the
opinion of the Reparation Commission, represents expenditure by the Governments of the German Empire or States upon the Government properties
referred to in Article 256 shall be excluded from the apportionment to be
made under Article 254.
ARTICLE 256
Powers to which German territory is ceded shall acquire all property and
possessions situated therein belonging to the German Empire or to the German States, and the value of such acquisitions shall be fixed by the Reparation
Commission, and paid by the State acquiring the territory to the Reparation
Commission for the credit of the German Government on account of the sums
due for reparation.
For the purposes of this Article the property and possessions of the German
Empire and States shall be deemed to include all the property of the Crown,
the Empire or the States, and the private property of the former German
Emperor and other Royal personages.
In view of the terms on which Alsace-Lorraine was ceded to Germany in
1871, France shall be exempt in respect thereof from making any payment
or credit under this Article for any property or possessions of the German
Empire or States situated therein.
Belgium also shall be exempt from making any payment or any credit
under this Article for any property or possessions of the German Empire or
States situated in German territory ceded to Belgium under the present Treaty.

21 H-!116-G.!J-12

162

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

257

In the case of the former German territories, including colonies, protectorates or dependencies, administered by a Mandatory under Article 22 of
Part I (League of Nations) of the present Treaty, neither the territory nor
the Mandatory Power shall be charged with any portion of the debt of the
German Empire or States.
All property and possessions belonging to the German Empire or to the
German States situated in such territories shall be transferred with the
territories to the Mandatory Power in its capacity as such and no payment
shall be made nor any credit given to those Governments in consideration of
this transfer.
For the purposes of this Article the property and possessions of the
German Empire and of the German States shall be deemed to include all
the property of the Crown, the Empire or the States and the private property
of the former German Emperor and other Royal personages.
ARTICLE

258

Germany renounces all rights accorded to her or her nationals by treaties,
conventions or agreements, of whatsoever kind, to representation upon or
participation in the control or administration of commissions, state banks,
agencies or other financial or economic organisations of an international
character, exercising powers of control or administration, and operating in
any of the Allied or Associated States, or in Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria or
Turkey, or in the dependencies of these States, or in the former Russian
Empire.
ARTICLE 259
( 1) Germany agrees to deliver within one month from the date of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, to such authority as the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers may designate, the sum in gold which was to
be deposited in the Reichsbank in the name of the Council of the Administration of the Ottoman Public Debt as security for the first issue of Turkish
Government currency notes.
(2) Germany recognises her obligation to make annually for the period
of twelve years the payments in gold for which proyision is made in the
German Treasury Bonds deposited by her from time to time in the name
of the Council of the Administration of the Ottoman Public Debt as security
for the second and subsequent issues of Turkish Government currency notes.
(3) Germany undertakes to deliver, within one month from the coming
into force of the present Treaty, to such authority as the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers may designate, the gold deposit constituted in the Reichsbank or elsewhere, representing the residue of the advance in gold agreed
to on May 5, 1915, by the Council of the Administration of the Ottoman
Public Debt to the Imperial Ottoman Government.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

163

(4) Gennany agrees to transfer to the Principal Allied and Associated
Powers any title that she may have to the sum in gold and silver transmitted
by her to the Turkish Ministry of Finance in November, 1918, in anticipation
of the payment to be made in May, 1919, for the service of the Turkish InternalLoan.
(5) Germany undertakes to transfer to the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, within a period of one month from the coming into force of the
present Treaty, any sums in gold transferred as pledge or as collateral security
to the German Government or its nationals in connection with loans made by
them to the Austro-Hungarian Government.
(6) Without prejudice to Article 292 of Part X (Economic Clauses) of
the present Treaty, Germany confirms the renunciation provided for in Article
XV of the Armistice of November 11, 1918, of any benefit disclosed by the
Treaties of Bucharest and of Brest-Litovsk and by the treaties supplementary
thereto.
Germany undertakes to transfer, either to Roumania or to the Principal
Allied and Associated Powers as the case may be, all monetary instruments,
specie, securities and negotiable instruments, or goods, which she has received
under the aforesaid Treaties.
(7) The sums of money and all securities, instruments and goods of
whatsoever nature, to be delivered, paid and transferred under the provisions of this Article, shall be disposed of by the Principal Allied and
Associated Powers in a manner hereafter to be determined by those Powers.
ARTICLE

260

Without prejudice to the renunciation of any rights by Germany on
behalf of herself or of her nationals in the other provisions of the present
Treaty, the Reparation Commission may within one year from the coming
into force of the present Treaty demand that the German Government
become possessed of any rights and interests of German nationals in any
public utility undertaking or in any concession operating in Russia, China,
Turkey, Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria, or in the possessions or dependencies of these States or in any territory formerly belonging to Germany
or her allies, to be ceded by Gennany or her allies to any Power or to be
administered by a Mandatory under the present Treaty, and may require
that the German Government transfer, within six months of the date of
demand, all such rights and interests and any similar rights and interests
the German Government may itself possess to the Reparation Commission.
Gennany shall be responsible for indemnifying her nationals so dispossessed, and the Reparation Commission shall credit Germany, on account
of sums due for reparation, with such sums in respect of the value of the
transferred rights and interests as may be assessed by the Reparation Commission, and the Gennan Government shall, within six months from the
coming into force of the present Treaty, communicate to the Reparation

164

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Commission all such rights and interests, whether already granted, contingent or not yet exercised, and shall renounce on behalf of itself and its
nationals in favour of the Allied and Associated Powers all such rights and
interests which have not been so communicated.
ARTICLE

261

Germany undertakes to transfer to the Allied and Associated Powers any
claims she may have to payment or repayment by the Governments of
Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria or Turkey, and, in particular, any claims which
may arise, now or hereafter, from the fulfilment of undertakings made by
Germany during the war to those Governments.
ARTICLE

262

Any monetary obligation due by Germany ansmg out of the present
Treaty and expressed in terms of gold marks shall be payable at the option
of the creditors in pounds sterling payable in London; gold dollars of the
United States of America payable in New York; gold francs payable in
Paris; or gold lire payable in Rome.
For the purpose of this Article the gold coins mentioned above shall be
defined as being of the weight and fineness of gold as enacted by law on
January 1, 1914.
ARTICLE 263
Germany gives a guarantee to the Brazilian Government that all sums
representing the sale of coffee belonging to the State of Sao Paolo in the
ports of Hamburg, Bremen, Antwerp and Trieste, which were deposited with
the Bank of Bleichroder at Berlin, shall be reimbursed together with interest
at the rate or rates agreed upon. Germany, having prevented the transfer
of the sums in question to the State of Sao Paolo at the proper time, guarantees also that the reimbursement shall be effected at the rate of exchange
of the day of the deposit.
PART X

ECONOMIC CLAUSES
SECTION I

Commercial Relations
CHAPTER

I

CUSTOMS REGULATIONS, DUTIES AND RESTRICTIONS
ARTICLE

264

Germany undertakes that goods the produce or manufacture of anyone
of the Allied or Associated States imported into German territory, from
whatsoever place arriving, shall not be subjected to other or higher duties

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

165

or charges (including internal charges) than those to which the like goods
the produce or manufacture of any other such State or of any other foreign
country are subject.
Germany will not maintain or impose any prohibition or restriction on
the importation into German territory of any goods the produce or manufacture of the territories of anyone of the Allied or Associated States, from
whatsoever place arriving, which shall not equally extend to the importation
of the like goods the produce or manufacture of any other such State or of
any other foreign country.
ARTICLE 265
Germany further undertakes that, in the matter of the regime applicable
on importation, no discrimination against the commerce of any of the Allied
and Associated States as compared with any other of the said States or any
other foreign country shall be made, even by indirect means, such as customs
regulations or procedure, methods of verification or analysis, conditions of
payment of duties, tariff classification or interpretation, or the operation of
monopolies.
ARTICLE 266
In all that concerns exportation Germany undertakes that goods, natural
products or manufactured articles, exported from German territory to the
territories of anyone of the Allied or Associated States shall not be subjected
to other or higher duties or charges (including internal charges) than those
paid on the like goods exported to any other such State or to any other
foreign country.
Germany will not maintain or impose any prohibition or restriction on
the exportation of any goods sent from her territory to anyone of the Allied
or Associated States which shall not equally extend to the exportation of
the like goods, natural products or manufactured articles, sent to any other
such State or to any other foreign country.

267
Every favour, immunity or privilege in regard to the importation, exportation or transit of goods granted by Germany to any Allied or Associated
State or to any other foreign country whatever shall simultaneously and
unconditionally, without request and without compensation, be extended
to all the Allied and Associated States.
ARTICLE

ARTICLE

268

The provisions of Articles 264 to 267 inclusive of this Chapter and of
Article 323 of Part XII (Ports, Waterways and Railways) of the present
Treaty are subject to the following exceptions:

(a) For a period of five years from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, natural or manufactured products which both originate in and come

166

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

from the territories of Alsace and Lorraine reunited to France shall, on
importation into German customs territory, be exempt from all customs
duty.
The French Government shall fix each year, by decree communicated
to the German Government, the nature and amount of the products which
shall enjoy this exemption.
The amount of each product which may be thus sent annually into
Germany shall not exceed the average of the amounts sent annually in
the years 1911-1913.
Further, during the period above mentioned the German Government
shall allow the free export from Germany, and the free re-importation into
Germany, exempt from all customs duties and other charges (including
internal charges), of yarns, tissues, and other textile materials or textile
products of any kind and in any condition, sent from Germany into the
territories of Alsace or Lorraine, to be subjected there to any finishing
process, such as bleaching, dyeing, printing, mercerisation, gassing, twisting
or dressing.
( b) During a period of three years from the coming into force of the
present Treaty natural or manufactured products which both originate in and
come from Polish territories which before the war were part of Germany
shall, on importation into German customs territory, be exempt from all
customs duty.
The Polish Government shall fix each year, by decree communicated to
the German Government, the nature and amount of the products which shall
enjoy this exemption.
The amount of each product which may be thus sent annually into Germany shall not exceed the average of the amounts sent annually in the years
1911-1913.
( c) The Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to require Germany to accord freedom from customs duty, on importation into German
customs territory, to natural products and manufactured articles which both
originate in and come from the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, for a period of
five years from the coming into force of the present Treaty.
The nature and amount of the products which shall enjoy the benefits of
this regime shall be communicated each year to the German Government.
The amount of each product which may be thus sent annually into Germany shall not exceed the average of the amounts sent annually in the years
1911-1913.
ARTICLE 269
During the first six months after the coming into force of the present
Treaty, the duties imposed by Germany on imports from Allied and Associated States shall not be higher than the most favourable duties which
were applied to imports into Germany on July 31, 1914.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

167

During a further period of thirty months after the expiration of the first
six months, this provision shall continue to be applied exclusively with
regard to products which, being comprised in Section A of the First Category
of the German Customs Tariff of December 25, 1902, enjoyed at the abovementioned date (July 31, 1914) rates conventionalised by treaties with the
Allied and Associated Powers, with the addition of all kinds of wine and
vegetable oils, of artificial silk and of washed or scoured wool, whether or
not they were the subject of special conventions before July 31, 1914.
ARTICLE

270

The Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to apply to German
territory occupied by their troops a special customs regime as regards imports
and exports, in the event of such a measure being necessary in their opinion
in order to safeguard the economic interests of the population of these
territories.
CHAPTER II
SHIPPING
ARTICLE

271

As regards sea fishing, maritime coasting trade, and maritime towage, vessels of the Allied and Associated Powers shall enjoy, in German territorial
waters, the treatment accorded to vessels of the most favoured nation.
ARTICLE

272

Germany agrees that, notwithstanding any stipulation to the contrary contained in the Conventions relating to the North Sea fisheries and liquor
traffic, all rights of inspection and police shall, in the case of fishing-boats of
the Allied Powers, be exercised solely by ships belonging to those Powers.
ARTICLE

273

In the case of vessels of the Allied or Associated Powers, all classes of
certificates or documents relating to the vessel, which were recognised as valid
by Germany before the war, or which may hereafter be recognised as valid
by the principal maritime States, shall be recognised by Germany as valid and
as equivalent to the corresponding certificates issued to German vessels.
A similar recognition shall be accorded to the certificates and documents
issued to their vessels by the Governments of new States, whether they have
a sea-coast or not, provided that such certificates and documents shall be
issued in conformity with the general practice observed in the principal
maritime States.
The High Contracting Parties agree to recognise the flag flown by the
vessels of an Allied or Associated Power having no sea-coast which are registered at some one specified place situated in its territory; such place shall
serve as the port of registry of such vessels.

168

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
CHAPTER

III

UNFAIR COMPETITION
ARTICLE

274

Germany undertakes to adopt all the necessary legislative and administrative measures to protect goods the produce or manufacture of anyone of the
Allied and Associated Powers from all forms of unfair competition in commercial transactions.
Germany undertakes to prohibit and repress by seizure and by other appropriate remedies the importation, exportation, manufacture, distribution,
sale or offering for sale in its territory of all goods bearing upon themselves or
their usual get-up or wrappings any marks, names, devices, or description
whatsoever which are calculated to convey directly or indirectly a false indication of the origin, type, nature, or special characteristics of such goods.
ARTICLE

275

Germany undertakes on condition that reciprocity is accorded in these
matters to respect any law, or any administrative or judicial decision given
in conformity with such law, in force in any Allied or Associated State and
duly communicated to her by the proper authorities, defining or regulating
the right to any regional appellation in respect of wine or spirits produced
in the State to which the region belongs, or the conditions under which the
use of any such appellation may be permitted; and the importation, exportation, manufacture, distribution, sale or offering for sale of products or articles
bearing regional appellations inconsistent with such law or order shall be
prohibited by the German Government and repressed by the measures
prescribed in the preceding Article.
CHAPTER

IV

TREATMENT OF NATIONALS OF ALLIED AND ASSOCIATED POWERS
ARTICLE

276

Germany undertakes:
(a) Not to subject the nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers to
any prohibition in regard to the exercise of occupations, professions, trade and
industry, which shall not be equally applicable to all aliens without exception;
(b) Not to subject the nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers in
regard to the rights referred to in paragraph (a) to any regulation or restriction which might contravene directly or indirectly the stipulations of the said
paragraph, or which shall be other or more disadvantageous than those which
are applicable to nationals of the most favoured nation;
(c) Not to subject the nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers,
their property, rights or interests, including companies and associations in

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

169

which they are interested, to any charge, tax or impost, direct or indirect,
other or higher than those which are or may be imposed on her own nationals
or their property, rights or interests;
(d) Not to subject the nationals of anyone of the Allied and Associated
Powers to any restriction which was not applicable on July 1, 1914, to the
nationals of such Powers unless such restriction is likewise imposed on her own
nationals.
ARTICLE 277
The nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers shall enjoy in German
territory a constant protection for their persons and for their property, rights
and interests, and shall have free access to the courts of law.
ARTICLE

278

Germany undertakes to recognise any new nationality which has been
or may be acquired by her nationals under the laws of the Allied and Associated Powers and in accordance with the decisions of the competent authorities of these Powers pursuant to naturalisation laws or under treaty
stipulations, and to regard such persons as having, in consequence of the
acquisition of such new nationality, in all respects severed their allegiance
to their country of origin.
ARTICLE 279
The Allied and Associated Powers may appoint consuls-general, consuls,
vice-consuls, and consular agents in German towns and ports. Germany
undertakes to approve the designation of the consuls-general, consuls, viceconsuls, and consular agents, whose names shall be notified to her, and to
admit them to the exercise of their functions in conformity with the usual
rules and customs.
CHAPTER

V

GENERAL ARTICLES
ARTICLE

280

The obligations imposed on Germany by Chapter I and by Articles 271
and 272 of Chapter II above shall cease to have effect five years from the
date of the coming into force of the present Treaty, unless otherwise provided
in the text, or unless the Council of the League of Nations shall, at least
twelve months before the expiration of that period, decide that these obligations shall be maintained for a further period with or without amendment.
Article 276 of Chapter IV shall remain in operation, with or without
amendment, after the period of five years for such further period, if any, not
exceeding five years, as may be determined by a majority of the Council of
the League of Nations.

170

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

ARTICLE 281

If the German Government engages in international trade, it shall not
in respect thereof have or be deemed to have any rights, privileges or
immunities of sovereignty.
SECTION II
Treaties
ARTICLE 282
From the coming into force of the present Treaty and subject to the
provisions thereof the multilateral treaties, conventions and agreements of
an economic or technical character enumerated below and in the subsequent
Articles shall alone be applied as between Germany and those of the Allied
and Associated Powers party thereto:
(1) Conventions of March 14, 1884,2~ December 1, 1886/3 and March
23, 1887,23 and Final Protocol of July 7, 1887,24 regarding the protection
of submarine cables.
(2) Convention of October 11, 1909, regarding the international circulation of motor-cars:
(3) Agreement of May 15, 1886, regarding the sealing of railway trucks
subject to customs inspection, and Protocol of May 18, 1907.
(4) Agreement of May 15, 1886, regarding the technical standardisation
of railways.
(5) Convention of July 5, 1890, regarding the publication of customs
tariffs and the organisation of an International Union for the publication
of customs tariffs. 25
(6) Convention of December 31, 1913, regarding the unification of
commercial statistics.
(7) Convention of April 25, 1907, regarding the raising of the Turkish
customs tariff.
(8) Convention of March 14, 1857, for the redemption of toll dues on
the Sound and Belts.
(9) Convention of June 22, 1861, for the redemption of the Stade Toll
on the E1be.
(10) Convention of July 16, 1863, for the redemption of the toll dues
on the Scheidt.
(11) Convention of October 29, 1888, regarding the establishment of
a definite arrangement guaranteeing the free use of the Suez Canal.
.. TS 380, ante, vol. 1, p. 89.
m TS 380-2, ante, vol. 1, p. 112
.. TS 380-3, ante, vol. 1, p. 114.
25 TS 384, ante, vol. 1, p. 172.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

171

( 12) Conventions of September 23, 1910, respecting the unification of
certain regulations regarding collisions 26 and salvage at sea. 27
(13) Convention of December 21, 1904, regarding the exemption of
hospital ships from dues and charges in ports. 28
( 14) Convention of February 4, 1898, regarding the tonnage measurement of vessels for inland navigation.
(15) Convention of September 26, 1906, for the suppression of nightwork for women.
( 16) Convention of September 26, 1906, for the suppression of the use
of white phosphorus in the manufacture of matches.
(17) Conventions of May 18, 1904,29 and May 4, 1910, regarding the
suppression of the White Slave Traffic.
(18) Convention of May 4, 1910, regarding the suppression of obscene
publications. so
(19) Sanitary Conventions of January 30, 1892, April 15, 1893, April
3, 1894, March 19, 1897, and December 3, 1903. s1
(20) Convention of May 20, 1875, regarding the unification and improvement of the metric system. 82
(21) Convention of November 29, 1906, regarding the unification of
pharmacop<:eial formulae for potent drugs. 33
(22) Convention of November 16 and 19, 1885, regarding the establishment of a concert pitch.
(23) Convention of June 7, 1905, regarding the creation of an International Agricultural Institute at Rome. s4
(24) Conventions of November 3, 1881, and April 15, 1889, regarding
p~ecautionary measures against phylloxera.
(25) Convention of March 19, 1902, regarding the protection of birds
useful to agriculture.
(26) Convention of June 12, 1902, as to the protection of minors.
ARTICLE

283

From the coming into force of the present Treaty the High Contracting
Parties shall apply the conventions and agreements hereinafter mentioned,
in so far as concerns them, on condition that the special stipulations contained
in this Article are fulfilled by Germany.
1911 For. ReI. 19.
TS 576, ante, yol. 1, p. 780.
.. TS 459, ante, yol. 1, p. 430.
m TS 496, ante, yol. 1, p. 424.
so TS 559, ante, yol. 1, p. 748.
III TS 466, ante, yol. 1, p. 359.
.. TS 378, ante, yol. 1, p. 39.
33 TS 510, ante, yol. 1, p. 568.
B< TS 489, ante, yol. 1, p. 436.
26

27

172

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Postal Conventions:
Conventions and agreements of the Universal Postal Union concluded at
Vienna, July 4, 1891. 35
Conventions and agreements of the Postal Union signed at Washington,
June 15,1897. 36
Conventions and agreements of the Postal Union signed at Rome, May
26, 1906. 37
Telegraphic Conventions:
International Telegraphic Conventions signed at St. Petersburg July 10/22,
1875.
Regulations and Tariffs drawn up by the International Telegraphic Conference, Lisbon, June 11, 1908.
Germany undertakes not to refuse her assent to the conclusion by the
new States of the special arrangements referred to in the conventions and
agreements relating to the Universal Postal Union and to the International
Telegraphic Union, to which the said new States have adhered or may adhere.
ARTICLE

284

From the coming into force of the present Treaty the High Contracting
Parties shall apply, in so far as concerns them, the International RadioTelegraphic Convention of July 5, 1912/8 on condition that Germany fulfils the provisional regulations which will be indicated to her by the Allied and
Associated Powers.
If within five years after the coming into force of the present Treaty a new
convention regulating international radio-telegraphic communications should
have been concluded to take the place of the Convention of July 5, 1912,
this new convention shall bind Germany, even if Germany should refuse either
to take part in drawing up the convention, or to subscribe thereto.
This new convention will likewise replace the provisional regulations in
force.
ARTICLE 285
From the coming into force of the present Treaty, the High Contracting
Parties shall apply in so far as concerns them and under the conditions stipulated in Article 272, the conventions hereinafter mentioned:

(l) The Conventions of May 6, 1882, and February 1, 1889, regulating
the fisheries in the North Sea outside territorial waters.
(2) The Conventions and Protocols of November 16, 1887, February
14, 1893, and April 11, 1894, regarding the North Sea liquor traffic.
Ante, vol. 1, p. 188.
Ante, vol. 1, p. 206.
37 Ante, vol. 1, p. 492.
38 TS 581, ante, vol. 1, p. 883.
35
30

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

173

286

The International Convention of Paris of March 20, 1883,39 for the protection of industrial property, revised at Washington on June 2, 1911 ;40 and
the International Convention of Berne of September 9, 1886, for the protection of literary and artistic works, revised at Berlin on November 13, 1908,
and completed by the additional Protocol signed at Berne on March 20, 1914,
will again come into effect as from the coming into force of the present Treaty,
in so far as they are not affected or modified by the exceptions and restrictions
resulting therefrom.
ARTICLE 287
From the coming into force of the present Treaty the High Contracting
Parties shall apply, in so far as concerns them, the Convention of the Hague
of July 17, 1905, relating to civil procedure. This renewal, however, will
not apply to France, Portugal and Roumania.
ARTICLE

288

The special rights and privileges granted to Germany by Article 3 of
the Convention of December 2, 1899, relating to Samoa 41 shall be considered
to have terminated on August 4,1914.
ARTICLE

289

Each of the Allied or Associated Powers, being guided by the general
principles or special provisions of the present Treaty, shall notify to Germany
the bilateral treaties or conventions which such Allied or Associated Power
wishes to revive with Germany.
The notification referred to in the present Article shall be made either
directly or through the intermediary of another Power. Receipt thereof shall
be acknowledged in writing by Germany. The date of the revival shall be
that of the notification.
The Allied and Associated Powers undertake among themselves not to
revive with Germany any conventions or treaties which are not in accordance
with the terms of the present Treaty.
The notification shall mention any provisions of the said conventions and
treaties which, not being in accordance with the terms of the present Treaty,
shall not be considered as revived.
In case of any difference of opinion, the League of Nations will be called
on to decide.
A period of six months from the coming into force of the present Treaty
is allowed to the Allied and Associated Powers within which to make the
notification.

3. TS 379, ante, vol. 1, p. 80.
•0

41

TS 579, ante, vol. 1, p. 791.
TS 314, ante, vol. 1, p. 276.

174

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Only those bilateral treaties and conventions which have been the subject
of such a notification shall be revived between the Allied and Associated
Powers and Germany; all the others are and shall remain abrogated.
The above regulations apply to all bilateral treaties or conventions existing
between all the Allied and Associated Powers signatories to the present
Treaty and Germany, even if the said Allied and Associated Powers have
not been in a state of war with Germany.
ARTICLE

290

Germany recognises that all the treaties, conventions or agreements which
she has concluded with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria or Turkey since August
1, 1914, until the coming into force of the present Treaty are and remain
abrogated by the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

291

Germany undertakes to secure to the Allied and Associated Powers, and
to the officials and nationals of the said Powers, the enjoyment of all the
rights and advantages of any kind which she may have granted to Austria,
Hungary, Bulgaria or Turkey, or to the officials and nationals of these States
by treaties, conventions or arrangements concluded before August 1, 1914,
so long as those treaties, conventions or arrangements remain in force.
The Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to accept or not the
enjoyment of these rights and advantages.
ARTICLE

292

Germany recognises that all treaties, conventions or arrangements which
she concluded with Russia, or with any State or Government of which the
territory previously formed a part of Russia, or with Roumania, before August
1, 1914, or after that date until the coming into force of the present Treaty,
are and remain abrogated.
ARTICLE 293
Should an Allied or Associated Power, Russia, or a State or Government
of which the territory formerly constituted a part of Russia, have been forced
since August 1, 1914, by reason of military occupation or by other means or
for any other cause, to grant or to allow to be granted by the act of any public
authority, concessions, privileges and favours of any kind to Germany or to a
German national, such concessions, privileges and favours are ipso facto
annulled by the present Treaty.
No claims or indemnities which may result from this annulmen. shall be
charged against the Allied or Associated Powers or the Powers, States,
Governments or public authorities which are released from their engagements by the present Article.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
. ARTICLE

175

294

From the coming into force of the present Treaty Germany undertakes
to give the Allied and Associated Powers and their nationals the benefit ipso
facto of the rights and advantages of any kind which she has granted by
treaties, conventions, or arrangements to non-belligerent States or their
nationals since August 1, 1914, until the coming into force of the present
Treaty, so long as those treaties, conventions or arrangements remain in
force.
ARTICLE 295
Those of the High Contracting Parties who have not yet signed, or who
have signed but not yet ratified, the Opium Convention signed at The Hague
on January 23, 1912/ 2 agree to bring the said Convention into force, and
for this purpose to enact the necessary legislation without delay and in any
case within a period of twelve months from the coming into force of the
present Treaty.
Furthermore, they agree that ratification of the present Treaty should
in the case of Powers which have not yet ratified the Opium Convention be
deemed in all respects equivalent to the ratification of that Convention and
to the signature of the Special Protocol 43 which was opened at The Hague
in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the Third Opium Conference
in 1914 for bringing the said Convention into force.
For this purpose the Government of the French Republic will communicate to the Government of the Netherlands a certified copy of the protocol
of the deposit of ratifications of the present Treaty, and will invite the Government of the Netherlands to accept and deposit the said certified copy as if it
were a deposit of ratifications of the Opium Convention and a signature of
the Additional Protocol of 1914.
SECTION III

Debts
ARTICLE

296

There shall be settled through the intervention of Clearing Offices to be
established by each of the High Contracting Parties within three months of
the notification referred to in paragraph (e) hereafter the following classes
of pecuniary obligations:
( 1) Debts payable before the war and due by a national of one of the
Contracting Powers, residing within its territory, to a national of an Opposing
Power, residing within its territory;
(2) Debts which became payable during the war to nationals of one
TS 612, ante, vol. 1, p. 855.
'" Ante, vol. 1, p. 878.

.2

176

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Contracting Power residing within its territory and arose out of transactions
or contracts with the nationals of an Opposing Power, resident within its
territory, of which the total or partial execution was suspended on account
of the declaration of war;
(3) Interest which has accrued due before and during the war to a national
of one of the Contracting Powers in respect of securities issued by an Opposing Power, provided that the payment of interest on such securities to the
nationals of that Power or to neutrals has not been suspended during the war;
(4) Capital sums which have become payable before and during the war
to nationals of one of the Contracting Powers in respect of securities issued
by one of the Opposing Powers, provided that the payment of such capital
sums to nationals of that Power or to neutrals has not been suspended during
the war.
The proceeds of liquidation of enemy property, rights and interests mentioned in Section IV and in the Annex thereto will be accounted for through
the Clearing Offices, in the currency and at the rate of exchange hereinafter
pI;Ovided in paragraph (d), and disposed of by them under the conditions
provided by the said Section and Annex.
The settlements provided for in this Article shall be effected according
to the following principles and in accordance with the Annex to this Section:
(a) Each of the High Contracting Parties shall prohibit, as from the
coming into force of the present Treaty, both the payment and the acceptance
of payment of such debts, and also all communications between the interested
parties with regard to the settlement of the said debts otherwise than through
the Clearing Offices;
(b) Each of the High Contracting Parties shall be respectively responsible
for the payment of such debts due by its nationals, except in the cases where
before the war the debtor was in a state of bankruptcy or failure, or had given
formal indication of insolvency or where the debt was due by a company
whose business has been liquidated under emergency legislation during the
war. Nevertheless, debts due by the inhabitants of territory invaded or occupied by the enemy before the Armistice will not be guaranteed by the States
of which those territories form part;
(c) The sums due to the nationals of one of the High Contracting Parties
by the nationals of an Opposing State will be debited to the Clearing Office
of the country of the debtor, and paid to the creditor by the Clearing Office
of the country of the creditor;
(d) Debts shall be paid or credited in the currency of such one of the
Allied and Associated Powers, their colonies or protectorates, or the British
Dominions or India, as may be concerned. If the debts are payable in some
other currency they shall be paid or credited in the currency of the country
concerned, whether an Allied or Associated Power, Colony, Protectorate,
British Dominion or India, at the pre-war rate of exchange.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

177

For the purpose of this provision the pre-war rate of exchange shall be
defined as the average cable transfer rate prevailing in the Allied or Associated
country concerned during the month immediately preceding the outbreak of
war between the said country concerned and Germany.
If a contract provides for a fixed rate of exchange governing the conversion
of the currency in which the debt is stated into the currency of the Allied
or Associated country concerned, then the above provisions concerning the
rate of exchange shall not apply.
In the case of new States the currency in which and the rate of exchange
at which debts shall be paid or credited shall be determined by the Reparation Commission provided for in Part VIII (Reparation);
(e) The provisions of this Article and of the Annex hereto shall not apply
as between Germany on the one hand and anyone of the Allied and Associated Powers, their colonies or protectorates, or anyone of the British
Dominions or India on the other hand, unless within a period of one month
from the deposit of the ratification of the present Treaty by the Power in
question, or of the ratification on behalf of such Dominion or of India, notice
to that effect is given to Germany by the Government of such Allied or Associated Power or of such Dominion or of India as the case may be;
(f) The Allied and Associated Powers who have adopted this Article and
the Annex hereto may agree between themselves to apply them to their
respective nationals established in their territory so far as regards matters
between their nationals and German nationals. In this case the payments
made by application of this provision will be subject to arrangements between
the Allied and Associated Clearing Offices concerned.
ANNEX

1
Each of the High Contracting Parties will, within three months from
the notification provided for in Article 296, paragraph (e), establish a Clearing Office for the collection and payment of enemy debts.
.
Local Clearing Offices may be established for any particular portion of the
territories of the High Contracting Parties. Such local Clearing Offices may
perform all the functions of a central Clearing Office in their respective districts, except that all transactions with the Clearing Office in the Opposing
State must be effected through the central Clearing Office.

2
In this Annex the pecuniary obligations referred to in the first paragraph
of Article 296 are described "as enemy debts", the persons from whom the
same are due as "enemy debtors", the persons to whom they are due as

178

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

"enemy creditors", the Clearing Office in the country of the creditor is caned
the "Creditor Clearing Office", and the Clearing Office in the country of the
debtor is called the "Debtor Clearing Office."

3
The High Contracting Parties will subject contraventions of paragraph
( a) of Article 296 to the same penalties as are at present provided by their
legislation for trading with the enemy. They will similarly prohibit within
their territory all legal process relating to payment of enemy debts, except
in accordance with the provisions of this Annex.
4

The Government guarantee specified in paragraph (b) of Article 296 shall
take effect whenever, for any reason, a debt shall not be recoverable, except
in a case where at the date of the outbreak of war the debt was barred
by the laws of prescription in force in the country of the debtor, or where
the debtor was at that time in a state of bankruptcy or failure or had given
formal indication of insolvency, or where the debt was due by a company
whose business has been liquidated under emergency legislation during the
war. In such case the procedure specified by this Annex shall apply to payment of the dividends.
The terms "bankruptcy" and "failure" refer to the application of legislation providing for such juridical conditions. The expression "formal indication of insolvency" bears the same meaning as it has in English law.

5
Creditors shall give notice to the Creditor Clearing Office within six
months of its establishment of debts due to them, and shall furnish the
Clearing Office with any documents and information required of them.
The High Contracting Parties will take all suitable measures to trace and
punish collusion between enemy creditors and debtors. The Clearing Offices
will communicate to one another any evidence and information which might
help the discovery and punishment of such collusion.
The High Contracting Parties will facilitate as much as possible postal and
telegraphic communication at the expense of the parties concerned and
through the intervention of the Clearing Offices between debtors and creditors
desirous of coming to an agreement as to the amount of their debt.
The Creditor Clearing Office will notify the Debtor Clearing Office of all
debts declared to it. The Debtor Clearing Office will, in due course, inform
the Creditor Clearing Office which debts are admitted and which debts are
contested. In the latter case, the Debtor Clearing Office will give the grounds
for the non-admission of debt.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

179

6
When a debt has been admitted, in whole or in part, the Debtor Clearing
Office will at once credit the Creditor Clearing Office with the amount admitted, and at the same time notify it of such credit.

7
The debt shall be deemed to be admitted in full and shall be credited forthwith to the Creditor Clearing Office unless within three months from the
receipt of the notification or such longer time as may be agreed to by the
Creditor Clearing Office notice has been given by the Debtor Clearing Office
that it is not admitted.
8
When the whole or part of a debt is not admitted the two Clearing Offices
will examine into the matter jointly and will endeavour to bring the parties
to an agreement.
9
The Creditor Clearing Office will pay to the individual creditor the sums
credited to it out of the funds placed at its disposal by the Government of its
country and in accordance with the conditions fixed by the said Government,
retaining any sums considered necessary to cover risks, expenses or
commissions.
10
Any person having claimed payment of an enemy debt which is not
admitted in whole or in part shall pay to the clearing office, by way of fine,
interest at 5 per cent. on the part not admitted. Any person having unduly
refused to admit the whole or part of a debt claimed from him shall pay,
by way of fine, interest at 5 per cent. on the amount with regard to which
his refusal shall be disallowed.
Such interest shall run from the date of expiration of the period provided
for in paragraph 7 until the date on which the claim shall have been disallowed or the debt paid.
Each Clearing Office shall in so far as it is concerned take steps to collect
the fines above provided for, and will be responsible if such fines cannot
be collected.
The fines will be credited to the other Clearing Office, which shall retain
them as a contribution towards the cost of carrying out the present provisions.
11
The balance between the Clearing Offices shall be struck monthly and
the credit balance paid in cash by the debtor State within a week.
Nevertheless, any credit balances which may be due by one or more of
the Allied and Associated Powers shall be retained until complete payment

180

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

shall have been effected of the sums due to the Allied or Associated Powers
or their nationals on account of the war.

12
To facilitate discussion between the Clearing Offices each of them shall
have a representative at the place where the other is established.

13
Except for special reasons all discussions in regard to claims will, so far
as possible, take place at the Debtor Clearing Office.

14

In conformity with Article 296, paragraph (b), the High Contracting
Parties are responsible for the payment of the enemy debts owing by their
nationals.
The Debtor Clearing Office will therefore credit the Creditor Clearing
Office with all debts admitted, even in case of inability to collect them from
the individual debtor. The Governments concerned will, nevertheless, invest
their respective Clearing Offices with all necessary powers for the recovery
of debts which have been admitted.
As an exception, the admitted debts owing by persons having suffered
injury from acts of war shall only be credited to the Creditor Clearing Office
when the compensation due to the person concerned in respect of such
injury shall have been paid.
15
Each Government will defray the expenses of the Clearing Office set up
in its territory, including the salaries of the staff.

16
Where the two Clearing Offices are unable to agree whether a debt
claimed is due, or in case of a difference between an enemy debtor and an
enemy creditor or between the Clearing Offices, the dispute shall either be
referred to arbitration if the parties so agree under conditions fixed by agreement between them, or referred to the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal provided
for in Section VI hereafter.
At the request of the Creditor Clearing Office the dispute may, however,
be submitted to the jurisdiction of the Courts of the place of domicile of the
debtor.

17
Recovery of sums found by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal, the Court, or
the Arbitration Tribunal to be due shall be effected through the Clearing
Offices as if these sums were debts admitted by the Debtor Clearing Office.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

181

18
Each of the Governments concerned shall appoint an agent who will be
responsible for the presentation to the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal of the cases
conducted on behalf of its Clearing Office. This agent will exercise a general
control over the representatives or counsel employed by its nationals.
Decisions will be arrived at on documentary evidence, but it will be open
to the Tribunal to hear the parties in person, or according to their preference
by their representatives approved by the two Governments, or by the agent
referred to above, who shall be competent to intervene along with the party
or to re-open and maintain a claim abandoned by the same.

19
The Clearing Offices concerned will lay before the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal all the information and documents in their possession, so as to enable
the Tribunal to decide rapidly on the cases which are brought before it.

20
Where one of the parties concerned appeals against the joint decision of
the two Clearing Offices he shall make a deposit against the costs, which
deposit shall only be refunded when the first judgment is modified in
favour of the appellant and in proportion to the success he may attain, his
opponent in case of such a refund being required to pay an equivalent
proportion of the costs and expenses. Security accepted by the Tribunal may
be substituted for a deposit.
A fee of 5 per cent. of the amount in dispute shall be charged in respect
of all cases brought before the Tribunal. This fee shall, unless the Tribunal
directs otherwise, be borne by the unsuccessful party. Such fee shall be added
to the deposit referred to. It is also independent of their security.
The Tribunal may award to one of the parties a sum in respect of the
expenses of the proceedings.
Any sum payable under this paragraph shall be credited to the Clearing
Office of the successful party as a separate item.
21

With a view to the rapid settlement of claims, due regard shall be paid
in the appointment of all persons connected with the Clearing Offices or
with the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal to their knowledge of the language of the
other country concerned.
Each of the Clearing Offices will be at liberty to correspond with the
other and to forward documents in its own language.

182

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

22
Subject to any special agreement to the contrary between the Governments concerned, debts shall carry interest in accordance with the following
provisions:
Interest shall not be payable on sums of money due by way of dividend,
interest or other periodical payments which themselves represent interest on
capital.
The rate of interest shall be 5 per cent. per annum except in cases where, by
contract, law or custom, the creditor is entitled to payment of interest at a
different rate. In such cases the rate to which he is entitled shall prevail.
Interest shall run from the date of commencement of hostilities (or, if the
sum of money to be recovered fell due during the war, from the date at which
it fell due) until the sum is credited to the Clearing Office of the creditor.
Sums due by way of interest shall be treated as debts admitted by the
Clearing Offices and shall be credited to the Creditor Clearing Office in the
same way as such debts.

23
Where by decision of the Clearing Offices or the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal
a claim is held not to fall within Article 296, the creditor shall be at liberty
to prosecute the claim before the Courts or to take such other proceedings
as may be open to him.
The presentation of a claim to the Clearing Office suspends the operation
of any period of prescription.

24
The High Contracting Parties agree to regard the decisions of the Mixed
Arbitral Tribunal as final and conclusive, and to render them binding upon
their nationals.

25
In any case where a Creditor Clearing Office declines to notify a claim
to the Debtor Clearing Office, or to take any step provided for in this Annex,
intended to make effective in whole or in part a request of which it has received
due notice, the enemy creditor shall be entitled to receive from the Clearing
Office a certificate setting out the amount of the claim, and shall then be
entitled to prosecute the claim before the courts or to take such other proceedings as may be open to him.
SECTION IV

Property, Rights and Interests
ARTICLE

297

The question of private property, rights and interests in an enemy country
shall be settled according to the principles laid down in this Section and to
the provisions of the Annex hereto.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

183

(a) The exceptional war measures and measures of transfer (defined in
paragraph 3 of the Annex hereto) taken by Germany with respect to the
property, rights and interests of nationals of Allied or Associated Powers,
including companies and associations in which they are interested, when
liquidation has not been completed, shall be immediately discontinued or
stayed and the property, rights and interests concerned restored to their
owners, who shall enjoy full rights therein in accordance with the provisions
of Article 298.
(b) Subject to any contrary stipulations which may be provided for in
the present Treaty, the Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to
retain and liquidate all property, rights and interests belonging at the date
of the coming into force of the present Treaty to German nationals, or
companies controlled by them, within their territories, colonies, possessions
and protectorates, including territories ceded to them by the present Treaty.
The liquidation shall be carried out in accordance with the laws of the
Allied or Associated State concerned, and the German owner shall not be
able to dispose of such property, rights or interests nor to subject them to
any charge without the consent of that State.
German nationals who acquire ipso facto the nationality of an Allied or
Associated Power in accordance with the provisions of the present Treaty
will not be considered as German nationals within the meaning of this
paragraph.
(c) The price or the amount of compensation in respect of the exercise
of the right referred to in the preceding paragraph (b) will be fixed in
accordance with the methods of sale or valuation adopted by the laws of the
country in which the property has been retained or liquidated.
(d) As between the Allied and Associated Powers or their nationals
on the one hand and Germany or her nationals on the other hand, all the
exceptional war measures, or measures of transfer, or acts done or to be
done in execution of such measures as defined in paragraphs 1 and 3 of the
Annex hereto shall be considered as final and binding upon all persons
except as regards the reservations laid down in the present Treaty.
(e) The nationals of Allied and Associated Powers shall be entitled to
compensation in respect of damage or injury inflicted upon their property,
rights or interests, including any company or association in which they are
interested, in German territory as it existed on August 1, 1914, by the
application either of the exceptional war measures or measures of transfer
mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 3 of' the Annex hereto. The claims made
in this respect by such nationals shall be investigated, and the total of the
compensation shall be determined by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal provided
for in Section VI or by an Arbitrator appointed. by that Tribunal. This
compensation shall be borne by Germany, and may be charged upon the
property of German nationals within the territory or under the control of

184

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

the claimant's State. This property may be constituted as a pledge for enemy
liabilities under the conditions fixed by paragraph 4 of the Annex hereto.
The payment of this compensation may be made by the Allied or Associated
State, and the amount will be debited to Germany.
(I) Whenever a national of an Allied or Associated Power is entitled
to property which has been subjected to a measure of transfer in German
territory and expresses a desire for its restitution, his claim for compensation
in accorda,nce with paragraph (e) shall be satisfied by the restitution of the
said property if it still exists in specie.
In such case Germany shall take all necessary steps to restore the evicted
owner to the possession of his property, free from all encumbrances or
burdens with which it may have been charged after the liquidation, and to
indemnify all third parties injured by the restitution.
If the restitution provided for in this paragraph cannot be effected, private agreements arranged by the intermediation of the Powers concerned
or the Clearing Offices provided for in the Annex to Section III may be
made, in order to secure that the national of the Allied or Associated Power
may secure compensation for the injury referred to in paragraph (e) by the
grant of advantages or equivalents which he agrees to accept in place of
the property, rights or interests of which he was deprived.
Through restitution in accordance with this Article, the price or the
amount of compensation fixed by the application of paragraph (e) will be
reduced by the actual value of the property restored, account being taken
of compensation in respect of loss of use or deterioration.
(g) The rights conferred by paragraph (I) are reserved to owners who
are nationals of Allied or Associated Powers within whose territory legislative
measures prescribing the general liquidation of enemy property, rights or
interests were not applied before the signature of the Armistice.
(h) Except in cases where, by application of paragraph (I), restitutions
in specie have been made, the net proceeds of sales of enemy property, rights
or interests wherever situated carried out either by virtue of war legislation,
or by application of this Article, and in general all cash assets of enemies,
shall be dealt with as follows:
( 1) As regards Powers adopting Section III and the Annex thereto, the
said proceeds and cash assets shall be credited to the Power of which the owner
is a national, through the Clearing Office established thereunder; any credit
balance in favour of Germany resulting therefrom shall be dealt with as provided in Article 243.
(2) As regards Powers not adopting Section III and the Annex thereto,
the proceeds of the property, rights and interests, and the cash assets, of the
nationals of Allied or Associated Powers held by Germany shall be paid
immediately to the person entitled thereto or to his Government; the proceeds
of the property, rights and interests, and the cash assets, of German nationals

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

185

received by an Allied or Associated Power shall be subject to disposal by such
Power in accordance with its laws and regulations and may be applied in
payment of the claims and debts defined by this Article or paragraph 4 of
the Annex hereto. Any property, rights and interests or proceeds thereof or
cash assets not used as above provided may be retained by the said Allied or
Associated Power and if retained the cash value thereof shall be dealt with as
provided in Article 243.
In the case of liquidations effected in new States, which are signatories
of the present Treaty as Allied and Associated Powers, or in States which are
not entitled to share in the reparation payments to be made by Germany,
the proceeds of liquidations effected by such States shall, subject to the rights
of the Reparation Commission under the present Treaty, particularly under
Articles 235 and 260, be paid direct to the owner. If on the application of that
owner, the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal, provided for by Section VI of this Part,
or an arbitrator appointed by that Tribunal, is satisfied that the conditions
of the sale or measures taken by the Government of the State in question outside its general legislation were unfairly prejudicial to the price obtained, they
shall have discretion to award to the owner equitable compensation to be paid
by that State.
(i) Germany undertakes to compensate her nationals in respect of the
sale or retention of their property, rights or interests in Allied or Associated
States.
(j) The amount of all taxes and imposts upon capital levied or to be levied
by Germany on the property, rights and interests of the nationals of the Allied
or Associated Powers from November 11, 1918, until three months from the
coming into force of the present Treaty, or, in the case of property, rights or
interests which have been subjected to exceptional measures of war, until
restitution in accordance with the present Treaty, shall be restored to the
owners.
ARTICLE 298

Germany undertakes, with regard to the property, rights and interests,
including companies and associations in which they were interested, restored
to nationals of Allied and Associated Powers in accordance with the provisions of Article 297, paragraph (a) or (I) :
(a) to restore and maintain, except as expressly provided in the present
Treaty, the property, rights and interests of the nationals of Allied or Associated Powers in the legal position obtaining in respect of the property, rights
and interests of German nationals under the laws in force before the war;
( b) not to subject the property, rights or interests of the nationals of the
Allied or Associated Powers to any measures in derogation of property rights
which are not applied equally to the property, rights and interests of German
nationals, and to pay adequate compensation in the event of the application
of these measures.
219-916--69----13

186

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

ANNEX

1
In accordance with the provisions of Article 297, paragraph (d), the
validity of vesting orders and of orders for the winding up of businesses or
companies, and of any other orders, directions, decisions or instructions of any
court or any department of the Government of any of the High Contracting
Parties made or given, or purporting to be made or given, in pursuance of
war legislation with regard to enemy property, rights and interests is confirmed. The interests of all persons shall be regarded as having been effectively
dealt with by any order, direction, decision or instruction dealing with property in which they may be interested, whether or not such interests are
specifically mentioned in the order, direction, decision, or instruction. No
question shall be raised as to the regularity of a transfer of any property,
rights or interests dealt with in pursuance of any such order, direction, decision or instruction. Every action taken with regard to any property, business,
or company, whether as regards its investigation, sequestration, compulsory
administration, use, requisition, supervision, or winding up, the sale or management of property, rights or interests, the collection or discharge of debts,
the payment of costs, charges or expenses, or any other matter whatsoever,
in pursuance of orders, directions, decisions, or instructions of any court or of
any department of the Government of any of the High Contracting Parties,
made or given, or purporting to be made or given, in pursuance of war
legislation with regard to enemy property, rights or interests, is confirmed.
Provided that the provisions of this paragraph shall not be held to prejudice
the titles to property heretofore acquired in good faith and for value and in
accordance with the laws of the country in which the property is situated by
nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers.
The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to such of the abovementioned measures as have been taken by the German authorities in invaded
or occupied territory, nor to such of the above mentioned measures as have
been taken by Germany or the German authorities since November 11, 1918,
all of which shall be void.

2
No claim or action shall be made or brought against any Allied or Associated Power or against any person acting on behalf of or under the direction
of any legal authority or Department of the Government of such a Power
by Germany or by any German national wherever resident in respect of any
act or omission with regard to his property, rights or interests during the war
or in preparation for the war. Similarly no claim or action shall be made or
brought against any person in respect of any act or omission under or in
accordance with the exceptional war measures, laws or regulations of any
Allied or Associated Power.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

187

3
In Article 297 and this Annex the expression "exceptional war measures"
includes measures of all kinds, legislative, administrative, judicial or others,
that have been taken or will be taken hereafter with regard to enemy property, and which have had or will have the effect of removing from the proprietors the power of disposition over their property, though without affecting
the ownership, such as measures of supervision, of compulsory administration,
and of sequestration; or measures which have had or will have as an object
the seizure of, the use of, or the interference with enemy asset~, for whatsoever
motive, under whatsoever form or in whatsoever place. Acts in the execution
of these measures include all detentions, instructions, orders or decrees of
Government departments or courts applying these measures to enemy property, as well as acts performed by any person connected with the administration or the supervision of enemy property, such as the payment of debts, the
collecting of credits, the payment of any costs, charges or expenses, or the
collecting of fees.
Measures of transfer are those which have affected or will affect the
ownership of enemy property by transferring it in whole or in part to a person
other than the enemy owner, and without his consent, such as measures
directing the sale, liquidation, or devolution of ownership in enemy property,
or the cancelling of titles or securities.
4

All property, rights and interests of German nationals within the territory
of any Allied or Associated Power and the net proceeds of their sale, liquidation or other dealing therewith may be charged by that Allied or Associated
Power in the first place with payment of amounts due in respect of claims
by the nationals of that Allied or Associated Power with regard to their
property, rights and interests, including companies and associations in which
they are interested, in German territory, or debts owing to them by German
nationals, and with payment of claims growing out of acts committed by
the German Government or by any German authorities since July 31, 1914,
and before that Allied or Associated Power entered into the war. The amount
of such claims may be assessed by an arbitrator appointed by Mr. Gustave
Ador, if he is willing, or if no such appointment is made by him, by an
arbitrator appointed by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal provided for in Section
VI. They may be charged in the second place with payment of the amounts
due in respect of claims by the nationals of such Allied or Associated Power
with regard to their property, rights and interests in the territory of other
enemy Powers, in so far as those claims are otherwise unsatisfied.

5
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 297, where immediately before
the outbreak of war a company incorporated in an Allied or Associated State

188

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

had rights in common with a company controlled by it and incorporated in
Germany to the use of trade-marks in third countries, or enjoyed the use
in common with such company of unique means of reproduction of goods or
articles for sale in third countries, the former company shall alone have the
right to use these trade-marks in third countries to the exclusion of the German
company, and these unique means of reproduction shall be handed over to the
former company, notwithstanding any action taken under German war
legislation with regard to the latter company or its business, industrial property or shares. Nevertheless, the former company, if requested, shall deliver
to the latter company derivative copies permitting the continuation of reproduction of articles for use within German territory.
6

Up to the time when restitution is carried out in accordance with Article
297, Germany is responsible for the conservation of property, rights and
interests of the nationals of Allied or Associated Powers, including companies
and associations in which they are interested, that have been subjected by
her to exceptional war measures.

7
Within one year from the coming into force of the present Treaty the Allied
or Associated Powers will specify the property, rights and interests over which
they intend to exercise the right provided in Article 297, paragraph (f).
8
The restitution provided in Article 297 will be carried out by order of
the German Government or of the authorities which have been substituted
for it. Detailed accounts of the action of administrators shall be furnished to
the interested persons by the German authorities upon request, which may
be made at any time after the coming into force of the present Treaty.
9

Until completion of the liquidation provided for by Article 297, paragraph
(b), the property, rights and interests of German nationals will continue to
be subject to exceptional war measures that have been or will be taken with
regard to them.
10
Germany will, within six months from the coming into force of the present
Treaty, deliver to each Allied or Associated Power all securities, certificates,
deeds, or other documents of title held by its nationals and relating to property,
rights or interests situated in the territory of that Allied or Associated Power,
including any shares, stock debentures, debenture stock, or other obligations
of any company incorporated in accordance with the laws of that Power.
Germany will at any time on demand of any Allied or Associated Power
furnish such information as may be required with regard to the property,

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

189

rights and interests of German nationals within the territory of such Allied or
Associated Power, or with regard to any transactions concerning such property, rights or interests effected since July 1, 1914.

11
The expression "cash assets" includes all deposits or funds established
before or after the declaration of war, as well as all assets coming from
deposits, revenues, or profits collected by administrators, sequestrators, or
others from funds placed on deposit or otherwise, but does not include sums
belonging to the Allied or Associated Powers or to their component States,
Provinces, or Municipalities.
12
All investments wheresoever effected with the cash assets of nationals of
the High Contracting Parties, including companies and associations in which
such nationals were interested, by persons responsible for the administration
of enemy properties or having control over such administration, or by order
of such persons or of any authority whatsoever shall be annulled. These cash
assets shall be accounted for irrespective of any such investment.
13
Within one month from the coming into force of the present Treaty, or
on demand at any time, Germany will deliver to the Allied and Associated
Powers all accounts, vouchers, records, documents and information of any
kind which may be within German territory, and which concern the property,
rights and interests of the nationals of those Powers, including companies
and associations in which they are interested, that have been subjected to
an exceptional war measure, or to a measure of transfer either in German
territory or in territory occupied by Germany or her allies.
The controllers, supervisors, managers, administrators, sequestrators,
liquidators and receivers shall be personally responsible under guarantee of
the German Government for the immediate delivery in full of those accounts
and documents, and for their accuracy.
14
The provisions of Article 297 and this Annex relating to property, rights
and interests in an enemy country, and the proceeds of the liquidation thereof, apply to debts, credits and accounts, Section III regulating only the
method of payment.
In the settlement of matters provided for in Article 297 between Germany
and the Allied or Associated States, their colonies or protectorates, or anyone
of the British Dominions or India, in respect of any of which a declaration
shall not have been made that they adopt Section III, and between their
respective nationals, the provisions of Section III respecting the currency
in which payment is to be made and the rate of exchange and of interest shall

190

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

apply unless the Government of the Allied or Associated Power concerned
shall within six months of the coming into force of the present Treaty notify
Germany that the said provisions are not to be applied.

15
The provisions of Article 297 and this Annex apply to industrial, literary
and artistic property which has been or will be dealt with in the liquidation
of property, rights, interests, companies or businesses under war legislation
by the Allied or Associated Powers, or in accordance with the stipulations
of Article 297, paragraph (b).
SECTION

v

Contracts, Prescriptions, Judgments
ARTICLE

299

(a) Any contract concluded between enemies shall be regarded as having
been dissolved as from the time when any two of the parties became enemies,
except in respect of any debt or other pecuniary obligation arising out of
any act done or money paid thereunder, and subject to the exceptions and
special rules with regard to particular contracts or classes of contracts contained herein or in the Annex hereto.
(b) Any contract of which the execution shall be required in the general
interest, within six months from the date of the coming into force of the
present Treaty, by the Allied or Associated Governments of which one of
the parties is a national, shall be excepted from dissolution under this Article.
When the execution of the contract thus kept alive would, owing to the
alteration of trade conditions, cause one of the parties substantial prejudice
the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal provided for by Section VI shall be empowered
to grant to the prejudiced party equitable compensation.
(c) Having regard to the provisions of the constitution and law of the
United States of America, of Brazil, and of Japan, neither the present Article,
nor Article 300, nor the Annex hereto shall apply to contracts made between
nationals of these States and German nationals; nor shall Article 305 apply
to the United States of America or its nationals.
(d) The present Article and the annex hereto shall not apply to contracts
the parties to which became enemies by reason of one of them being an inhabitant of territory of which the sovereignty has been transferred, if such
party shall acquire under the present Treaty the nationality of an Allied
or Associated Power, nor shall they apply to contracts between nationals
of the Allied and Associated Powers between whom trading has been prohibited by reason of one of the parties being in Allied or Associated territory
in the occupation of the enemy.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

191

(e) Nothing in the present Article or the annex hereto shall be deemed
to invalidate a transaction lawfully carried out in accordance with a contract
between enemies if it has been carried out with the authority of one of the
belligerent Powers.
ARTICLE 300

(a) All periods of prescription, or limitation of right of action, whether
they began to run before or after the outbreak of war, shall be treated in
the territory of the High Contracting Parties, so far as regards relations
between enemies, as having been suspended for the duration of the war. They
shall begin to run again at earliest three months after the coming into force
of the present Treaty. This provision shall apply to the period prescribed for
the presentation of interest or dividend coupons or for the presentation for
repayment of securities drawn for repayment or repayable on any other
ground.
(b) Where, on account of failure to perform any act or comply with any
formality during the war, measures of execution have been taken in German
territory to the prejudice of a national of an Allied or Associated Power, the
claim of such national shall, if the matter does not fall within the competence
of the Courts of an Allied or Associated Power, be heard by the Mixed
Arbitral Tribunal provided for by Section VI.
(c) Upon the application of any interested person who is a national of
an Allied or Associated Power the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal shall order
the restoration of the rights which have been prejudiced by the measures of
execution referred to in paragraph (b), wherever, having regard to the
particular circumstances of the case, such restoration is equitable and possible.
If such restoration is inequitable or impossible the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal may grant compensation to the prejudiced party to be paid by the
German Government.
(d) Where a contract between enemies has been dissolved by reason
either of failure on the part of either party to carry out its provisions or of
the exercise of a right stipulated in the contract itself the party prejudiced
may apply to the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal for relief. The Tribunal will have
the powers provided for in paragraph (c).
(e) The provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this Article shall apply
to the nationals of Allied and Associated Powers who have been prejudiced
by reason of measures referred to above taken by Germany in invaded or
occupied territory, if they have not been otherwise compensated.
(I) Germany shall compensate any third party who may be prejudiced
by any restitution or restoration ordered by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal
under the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this Article.
(g) As regards negotiable instruments, the period of three months provided
under paragraph (a) shall commence as from the date on which any excep-

192

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

tional regulations applied in the territories of the interested Power with
regard to negotiable instruments shall have definitely ceased to have force.
ARTICLE

301

As between enemies no negotiable instrument made before the war shall
be deemed to have become invalid by reason only of failure within the
required time to present the instrument for acceptance or payment or to
give notice of non-acceptance or non-payment to drawers or indorsers or
to protest the instrument, nor by reason of failure to complete any formality
during the war.
Where the period within which a negotiable instrument should have been
presented for acceptance or for payment, or within which notice of nonacceptance or non-payment should have been given to the drawer or indorser,
or within which the instrument should have been protested, has elapsed during
the war, and the party who should have presented or protested the instrument or have given notice of non-acceptance or non-payment has failed to
do so during the war, a period of not less than three months from the coming
into force of the present Treaty shall be allowed within which presentation,
notice of non-acceptance or non-payment or protest may be made.
ARTICLE

302

Judgments given by the Courts of an Allied or Associated Power in all
cases which, under the present Treaty, they are competent to decide, shall
be recognised in Germany as final, and shall be enforced without it being
necessary to have them declared executory.
If a judgment in respect to any dispute which may have arisen has been
given during the war by a German Court against a national of an Allied or
Associated State in a case in which he was not able to make his defence, the
Allied and Associated national who has suffered prejudice thereby shall be
entitled to recover compensation, to be fixed by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal
provided for in Section VI.
At the instance of the national of the Allied or Associated Power the compensation above-mentioned may, upon order to that effect of the Mixed
Arbitral Tribunal, be effected where it is possible by replacing the parties
in the situation which they occupied before the judgment was given by the
German Court.
The above compensation may likewise be obtained before the Mixed
Arbitral Tribunal by the nationals of Allied or Associated Powers who have
suffered prejudice by judicial measures taken in invaded or occupied territories, if they have not been otherwise compensated.
ARTICLE

303

For the purpose of Sections III, IV, V and VII, the expression "during
the war" means for each Allied or Associated Power the period between

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

193

the commencement of the state of war between that Power and Germany and
the coming into force of the present Treaty.

ANNEX
I. General Provisions

1
Within the meaning of Articles 299, 300 and 301, the parties to a contract
shall be regarded as enemies when trading between them shall have been
prohibited by or otherwise became unlawful under laws, orders or regulations to which one of those parties was subject. They shall be deemed to have
become enemies from the date when such trading was prohibited or otherwise
became unlawful.
2
The following classes of contracts are excepted from dissolution by Article
299 and, without prejudice to the rights contained in Article 297 (b) of
Section IV, remain in force subject to the application of domestic laws, orders
or regulations made during the war by the Allied and Associated Powers and
subject to the terms of the contracts:
(a) Contracts having for their object the transfer of estates or of real or
personal property where the property therein had passed or the object had
been delivered before the parties became enemies;
(b) Leases and agreements for leases of land and houses;
(c) Contracts of mortgage, pledge or lien;
(d) Concessions concerning mines, quarries or deposits;
(e) Contracts between individuals or companies and States, provinces,
municipalities, or other similar juridical persons charged with administrative
functions, and concessions granted by States, provinces, municipalities, or
other similar juridical persons charged with administrative functions.
3
If the provisions of a contract are in part dissolved under Article 299, the
remaining provisions of that contract shall, subject to the same application
of domestic laws as it> provided for in paragraph 2, continue in force if they
are severable, but where they are not severable the contract shall be deemed
to have been dissolved in its entirety.
II. Provisions relating to certain classes of Contracts
STOCK EXCHANGE AND COMMERCIAL EXCHANGE CONTRACTS

4
(a) Rules made during the war by any recognised Exchange or Commercial Association providing for the closure of contracts entered into before
210-9,16-69-14

194

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

the war by an enemy are confirmed by the High Contracting Parties, as also
any action taken thereunder, provided:
( 1) That the contract was expressed to be made subject to the rules
of the Exchange or Association in question;
(2) That the rules applied to all persons concerned;
(3) That the conditions attaching to the closure were fair and reasonable.

(b) The preceding paragraph shall not apply to rules made during the
occupation by Exchanges or Commercial Associations in the districts occupied by the enemy.
(c) The closure of contracts relating to cotton "futures", which were
closed as on July 31, 1914, under the decision of the Liverpool Cotton Association, is also confirmed.
SECURITY

5
The sale of a security held for an unpaid debt owing by an enemy shall
be deemed to have been valid irrespective of notice to the owner if the creditor
acted in good faith and with reasonable care and prudence, and no claim
by the debtor on the ground of such sale shall be admitted.
This stipulation shall not apply to any sale of securities effected by an
enemy during the occupation in regions invaded or occupied by the enemy.
NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS

6

As regards Powers which adopt Section III and the Annex thereto the
pecuniary obligations existing between enemies and resulting from the issue of
negotiable instruments shall be adjusted in conformity with the said Annex
by the instrumentality of the Clearing Offices, which shall assume the rights
of the holder as regards the various remedies open to him.

7
If a person has either before or during the war become liable upon a
negotiable instrument in accordance with an undertaking given to him by a
person who has subsequently become an enemy, the latter shall remain liable
to indemnify the former in respect of his liability notwithstanding the outbreak
of war.
III. Contracts of Insurance

8
Contracts of insurance entered into by any person with another person
who subsequently became an enemy will be dealt with in accordance with
the following paragraphs.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

195

FIRE INSURANCE

9

Contracts for the insurance of property against fire entered into by a person interested in such property with another person who subsequently became
an enemy shall not be deemed to have been dissolved by the outbreak of war,
or by the fact of the person becoming an enemy, or on account of the failure
during the war and for a period of three months thereafter to perform his
obligations under the contract, but they shall be dissolved at the date when
the annual premium becomes payable for the first time after the expiration of
a period of three months after the coming into force of the present Treaty.
A settlement shall be effected of unpaid premiums which became due
during the war, or of claims for losses which occurred during the war.

10
Where by administrative or legislative action an insurance against fire
effected before the war has been transferred during the war from the original
to another insurer, the transfer will be recognised and the liability of the
original insurer will be deemed to have ceased as from the date of the transfer.
The original insurer will, however, be entitled to receive on demand full
information as to the terms of the transfer, and if it should appear that these
terms were not equitable they shall be amended so far as may be necessary to
render them equitable.
Furthermore, the insured shall, subject to the concurrence of the original
insurer, be entitled to retransfer the contract to the original insurer as from
the date of the demand.
LIFE INSURANCE

11
Contracts of life insurance entered into between an insurer and a person
who subsequently became an enemy shall not be deemed to have been dissolved by the outbreak of war, or by the fact of the person becoming an
enemy.
Any sum which during the war became due upon a contract deemed not to
have been dissolved under the preceding provision shall be recoverable after
the war with the addition of interest at five per cent. per annum from the
date of its becoming due up to the day of payment.
Where the contract has lapsed' during the war owing to non-payment of
premiums, or has become void from breach of the conditions of the contract,
the assured or his representatives or the person entitled shall have the right
at any time within twelve months of the coming into force of the present
Treaty to claim from the insurer the surrender value of the policy at the date
of its lapse or avoidance.

196

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Where the contract has lapsed during the war owing to non-payment of
premiums the payment of which has been prevented by the enforcement of
measures of war, the assured or his representative or the persons entitled shall
have the right to restore the contract on payment of the premiums with interest at five per cent. per annum within three months from the coming into
force of the present Treaty.

12
Any Allied or Associated Power may within three months of the coming
into force of the present Treaty cancel all the contracts of insurance running
between a German insurance company and its nationals under conditions
which shall protect its nationals from any prejudice.
To this end the German insurance company will hand over to the Allied
or Associated Government concerned the proportion of its assets attributable
to the policies so cancelled and will be relieved from all liability in respect
of such policies. The assets to be handed over shall be determined by an
actuary appointed by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal.

13
Where contracts of life insurance have been entered into by a local branch
of an insurance company established in a country which subsequently became
an enemy country, the contract shall, in the absence of any stipulation to the
contrary in the contract itself, be governed by the local law, but the insurer
shall be entitled to demand from the insured or his representatives the refund
of sums paid on claims made or enforced under measures taken during the
war, if the making or enforcement of such claims was not in accordance
with the terms of the contract it~elf or was not consistent with the laws or
treaties existing at the time when it was entered into.
14
In any case where by the law applicable to the contract the insurer remains
bound by the contract notwithstanding the non-payment of premiums until
notice is given to the insured of the termination of the contract, he shall be
entitled where the giving of such notice was prevented by the war to recover
the unpaid premiums with interest at five per cent. per annum from the
insured.
15
Insurance contracts shall be considered as contracts of life assurance for
the purpose of paragraphs 11 to 14 when they depend on the probabilities
of human life combined with the rate of interest for the calculation of the
reciprocal engagements between the two parties.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

197

MARINE INSURANCE

16

Contracts of marine insurance including time policies and voyage policies
entered into between an insurer and a person who subsequently became an
enemy, shall be deemed to have been dissolved on his becoming an enemy,
except in cases where the risk undertaken in the contract had attached before
he became an enemy.
Where the risk had not attached, money paid by way of premium or
otherwise shall be recoverable from the insurer.
Where the risk had attached effect shall be given to the contract notwithstanding the party becoming an enemy, and sums due under the contract
either by way of premiums or in respect of losses shall be recoverable after the
coming into force of the present Treaty.
In the event of any agreement being come to for the payment of interest
on sums due before the war to or by the nationals of States which have been
at war and recovered after the war, such interest shall in the case of losses
recoverable under contracts of marine insurance run from the expiration
of a period of one year from the date of the loss.

17
No contract of marine insurance with an insured person who subsequently
became an enemy shall be deemed to cover losses due to belligerent action
by the Power of which the insurer was a national or by the allies or associates
of such Power.
18
Where it is shown that a person who had before the war entered into a
contract of marine insurance with an insurer who subsequently became an
enemy entered after the outbreak of war into a new contract covering the
same risk with an insurer who was not an enemy, the new contract shall be
deemed to be substituted for the original contract as from the date when it
was entered into, and the premiums payable shall be adjusted on the basis
of the original insurer having remained liable on the contract only up till the
time when the new contract was entered into.
OTHER INSURANCES

19
Contracts of insurance entered into before the war between an insurer
and a person who subsequently became an enemy, other than contracts dealt
with in paragraphs 9 to 18, shall be treated in all respects on the same footing
as contracts of fire insurance between the same persons would be dealt with
under the said paragraphs.

198

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
RE-INSURANCE

20
All treaties of re-insurance with a person who became an enemy shall be
regarded as having been abrogated by the person becoming an enemy, but
without prejudice in the case of life or marine risks which had attached
before the war to the right to recover payment after the war for sums due
in respect of such risks.
Nevertheless if, owing to invasion, it has been impossible for the re-insured
to find another re-insurer, the treaty shall remain in force until three months
after the coming into force of the present Treaty.
Where a re-insurance treaty becomes void under this paragraph, there
shall be an adjustment of accounts between the parties in respect both of
premiums paid and payable and of liabilities for losses in respect of life or
marine risks which had attached before the war. In the case of risks other
than those mentioned in paragraphs 11 to 18 the adjustment of accounts
shall be made as at the date of the parties becoming enemies without regard
to claims for losses which may have occurred since that date.
21
The provisions of the preceding paragraph will extend equally to re-insurances existing at the date of the parties becoming enemies of particular risks
undertaken by the insurer in a contract of insurance against any risks other
than life or marine risks.

22
Re-insurance of life risks effected by particular contracts and not under
any general treaty remain in force.
The provisions of paragraph 12 apply to treaties of re-insurance of life
insurance contracts in which enemy companies are the re-insurers.

23
In case of a re-insurance effected before the war of a contract of marine
insurance, the cession of a risk which had been ceded to the re-insurer shall,
if it had attached before the outbreak of war, remain valid and effect be
given to the contract notwithstanding the outbreak of war; sums due under
the contract of re-insurance in respect either of premiums or of losses shall
be recoverable after the war.

24
The provisions of paragraphs 17 and 18 and the last part of paragraph 16
shall apply to contracts for the re-insurance of marine risks.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

199

SECTION VI

Mixed Arbitral Tribunal
ARTICLE

304

(a) Within three months from the date of the coming into force of the
present Treaty, a Mixed Arbitral Tribunal shall be established between each
of the Allied and Associated Powers on the one hand and Germany on the
other hand. Each such Tribunal shall consist of three members. Each of
the Governments concerned shall appoint one of these members. The President shall be chosen by agreement between the two Governments concerned.
In case of failure to reach agreement, the President of the Tribunal and
two other persons either of whom may in case of need take his place, shall be
chosen by the Council of the League of Nations, or, until this is set up, by
M. Gustave Ador if he is willing. These persons shall be nationals of Powers
that have remained neutral during the war.
If any Government does not proceed within a period of one month in
case there is a vacancy to appoint a member of the Tribunal, such member
shall be chosen by the other Government from the two persons mentioned
above other than the President.
The decision of the majority of the members of the Tribunal shall be the
decision of the Tribunal.
.
.
( b) The Mixed Arbitral Tribunals established pursuant to paragraph
( a ), shall decide all questions within their competence under Sections III,
IV, V and VII.
In addition, all questions, whatsoever their nature, relating to contracts
concluded before the coming into force of the present Treaty between
nationals of the Allied and Associated Powers and German nationals shall
be decided by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal, always excepting questions
which, under the laws of the Allied, Associated or Neutral Powers, are within
the jurisdiction of the National Courts p£ those Powers. Such questions shall
be decided by the National Courts in queStion, to the exclusion of the Mixed
Arbitral Tribunal. The party who is a national of an Allied or Associated
Power may nevertheless bring the case before the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal
if this is not prohibited by the laws of hfs country.
(c) If the number of cases justifies it, additional members shall be
appointed and each Mixed Arbitral Tribunal shall sit in divisions. Each
of these divisions will be constituted as above.
(d) Each Mixed Arbitral Tribunal will settle its own procedure except
in so far as it is provided in the following Annex, and is empowered to award
the sums to be paid by the loser in respect of the costs and expenses of the
proceedings.
(e) Each Government will pay the remuneration of the member of the
Mixed Arbitral Tribunal appointed by it and of any agent whom it may

200

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

appoint to represent it before the Tribunal. The remuneration of the
President will be determined by special agreement between the Governments
concerned; and this remuneration and the joint expenses of each Tribunal
will be paid by the two Governments in equal moieties.
(I) The High Contracting Parties agree that their courts and authorities shall render to the Mixed Arbitral Tribunals direct all the assistance in
their power, particularly as regards transmitting notices and collecting
evidence.
(g) The High Contracting Parties agree to regard the decisions of the
Mixed Arbitral Tribunal as final and conclusive, and to render them binding
upon their nationals.
ANNEX

1
Should one of the members of the Tribunal either die, retire, or be unable
for any reason whatever to discharge his function, the same procedure will
be followed for filling the vacancy as was followed for appointing him.

2
The Tribunal may adopt such rules of procedure as shall be in accordance
with justice and equity and decide the order and time at which each party
must conclude its arguments, and may arrange all formalities required for
dealing with the evidence.
3
The agent and counsel of the parties on each side are authorized to present
orally and in writing to the Tribunal arguments in support or in defence of
each case.
4

The Tribunal shall keep record of the questions and cases submitted and
the proceedings thereon, with the dates of such proceedings.

5
Each of the Powers concerned may appoint a secretary. These secretaries
shall act together as joint secretaries of the Tribunal and shall be subject
to its direction: The Tribunal may appoint and employ any other necessary
officer or officers to assist in the performance of its duties.

6
The Tribunal shall decide all questions and matters submitted upon such
evidence and information as may be furnished by the parties concerned.

7
Germany agrees to give the Tribunal all facilities and information required
by it for carrying out its investigations.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-jUNE 28, 1919

201

8
The language in which the proceedings shall be conducted shall, unless
otherwise agreed, be English, French, Italian or Japanese, as may be determined by the Allied or Associated Power concerned.
9

The place and time for the meetings of each Tribunal shall be determined
by the President of the Tribunal.
ARTICLE

305

Whenever a competent court has given or gives a decision in a case covered
by Sections III, IV, V or VII, and such decision is inconsistent with the
provisions of such Sections, the party who is prejudiced by the decision shall
be entitled to obtain redress which shall be fixed by the Mixed Arbitral
Tribunal. At the request of the national of an Allied or Associated Power, the
redress may, whenever possible, be effected by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal
directing the replacement of the parties in the position occupied by them
before the judgment was given by the German court.
SECTION VII

Industrial Property
ARTICLE

306

Subject to the stipulations of the present Treaty, rights of industrial,
literary and artistic property, as such property is defined by the International
Conventions of Paris and of Berne, mentioned in Article 286, shall be reestablished or restored, as from the coming into force of the present Treaty,
in the territories of the High Contracting Parties, in favour of the persons
entitled to the benefit of them at the moment when the state of war commenced or their legal representatives. Equally, rights which, except for the
war, would have been acquired during the war in consequence of an application made for the protection of industrial property, or the publication of
a literary or artistic work, shall be recognised and established in favour of
those persons who would have been entitled thereto, from the coming into
force of the present Treaty.
Nevertheless, all acts done by virtue of the special measures taken during
the war under legislative, executive or administrative authority of any Allied
or Associated Power in regard to the rights of German nationals in industrial,
literary or artistic property shall remain in force and shall continue to maintain their full effect.
No claim shall be made or action brought by Germany or German nationals in respect of the use during the war by the Government of any
Allied or Associated Power, or by any persons acting on behalf or with the

202

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

assent of such Government, of any rights in industrial, literary or artistic
property, nor in respect of the sale, offering for sale, or use of any products,
articles or apparatus whatsoever to which such rights applied.
Unless the legislation of anyone of the Allied or Associated Powers in
force at the moment of the signature of the present Treaty otherwise directs,
sums due or paid in virtue of any act or operation resulting from the execution of the special measures mentioned in paragraph I of this Article shall
be dealt with in the same way as other sums due to German nationals are
directed to be dealt with by the present Treaty; and sums produced by any
special measures taken by the German Government in respect of rights in
industrial, literary or artistic property belonging to the nationals of the Allied
or Associated Powers shall be considered and treated in the same way as
other debts due from German nationals.
Each of the Allied and Associated Powers reserves to itself the right to
impose such limitations, conditions or restrictions on rights of industrial,
literary or artistic property (with the exception of trade-marks) acquired
before or during the war, or which may be subsequently acquired in accordance with its legislation, by German nationals, whether by granting
licences, or by the working, or by preserving control over their exploitation,
or in any other way, as may be considered necessary for national defence, or
in the public interest, or for assuring the fair treatment by Germany of the
rights of industrial, literary and artistic property held in German territory
by its nationals, or for securing the due fulfilment of all the obligations undertaken by Germany in the present Treaty. As regards rights of industrial,
literary and artistic property acquired after the coming into force of the
present Treaty, the right so reserved by the Allied and Associated Powers
shall only be exercised in cases where these limitations, conditions or restrictions may be considered necessary for national defence or in the public
interest.
In the event of the application of the provisions of the preceding paragraph by any Allied or Associated Power, there shall be paid reasonable indemnities or royalties, which shall be dealt with in the same way as other
sums due to German nationals are directed to be dealt with by the present
Treaty.
Each of the Allied or Associated Powers reserves the right to treat as
void and of no effect any transfer in whole or in part or other dealing with
rights of or in respect of industrial, literary or artistic property effected after
August 1, 1914, or in the future, which would have the result of defeating
the objects of the provisions of this Article.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to rights in industrial, literary
or artistic property which have been dealt with in the liquidation of businesses or companies under war legislation by the Allied or Associated
Powers, or which may be so dealt with by virtue of Article 297, paragraph
(b) .

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

203

307

A minimum of one year after the coming into force of the present Treaty
shall be accorded to the nationals of the High Contracting Parties, without
extension fees or other penalty, in order to enable such persons to accomplish
any act, fulfil any fonnality, pay any fees, and generally satisfy any obligation prescribed by the laws or regulations of the respective States relating
to the obtaining, preserving, or opposing rights to, or in respect of, industrial
property either acquired before August 1, 1914, or which, except for the
war, might have been acquired since that date as a result of an application
made before the war or during its continuance, but nothing in this Article
shall give any right to reopen interference proceedings in the United States
of America where a final hearing has taken place..
All rights in, or in respect of, such property which may have lapsed by
reason of any failure to accomplish any act, fulfil any formality, or make any
payment, shall revive, but subject in the case of patents and designs to the
imposition of such conditions as each Allied or Associated Power may deem
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons who have manufactured or made use of the subject matter of such property while the rights
had lapsed. Further,. where rights to patents or designs belonging to Gennan
nationals are revived under this Article, they shall be subject in respect of
the grant of licences to the same provisions as would have been applicable
to them during the war, as well as to all the provisions of the present Treaty.
The period from August 1, 1914, until the coming into force of the present
Treaty shall be excluded in considering the time within which a patent
should be worked or a trade mark or design used, and it is further agreed
that no patent, registered trade mark or design in force on August 1, 1914,
shall be subject to revocation or cancellation by reason only of the failure
to work such patent or use such trade mark or design for two years after
the coming into force of the present Treaty.
ARTICLE

308

The rights of priority, provided by Article 4 of the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of Paris, of March 20, 1883,
revised at Washington in 1911 or by any other Convention or Statute, for
the filing or registration of applications for patents or models of utility, and
for the registration of trade marks, designs and models which had not expired
on August 1, 1914, and those which have arisen during the war, or would
have arisen but for the war, shall be extended by each of the High Contracting Parties in favour of all nationals of the other High Contracting Parties
for a period of six months after the coming into force of the present Treaty.
Nevertheless, such extension shall in no way affect the right of any of the
High Contracting Parties or of any person who before the coming into force
of the present Treaty was bona fide in possession of any rights of industrial

204

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

property conflicting with rights applied for by another who claims rights
of priority in respect of them, to exercise such rights by itself or himself
personally, or by such agents or licensees as derived their rights from it or
him before the coming into force of the present Treaty; and such persons
shall not be amenable to any action or other process of law in respect of
infringement.
ARTICLE 309
No action shall be brought and no claim made by persons residing or
carrying on business within the territories of Gennany on the one part and
of the Allied or Associated Powers on the other, or persons who are nationals
of such Powers respectively, or by anyone deriving title during the war from
such persons, by reason of any action which has taken place within the territory of the other party between the date of the declaration of war and that of
the coming into force of the present Treaty, which might constitute an
infringement of the rights of industrial property or rights of literary and
artistic property, either existing at any time during the war or revived under
the provisions of Articles 307 and 308.
Equally, no action for infringement of industrial, literary or artistic property rights by such persons shall at any time be permissible in respect of the
sale or offering for sale for a period of one year after the signature of the
present Treaty in the territories of the Allied or Associated Powers on the
one hand or Gennany on the other, of products or articles manufactured, or
of literary or artistic works published, during the period between the declaration of war and the signature of the present Treaty, or against those who have
acquired and continue to use them. It is understood, nevertheless, that this
provision shall not apply when the possessor of the rights was domiciled or had
an industrial or commercial establishment in the districts occupied by
Germany during the war.
This Article shall not apply as between the United States of America on the
one hand and Germany on the other.
ARTICLE

310

Licences in respect of industrial, literary or artistic property concluded before the war between nationals of the Allied or Associated Powers or persons
residing in their territory or carrying on business therein, on the one part, and
Gennan nationals, on the other part, shall be considered as cancelled as from
the date of the declaration of war between Germany and the Allied or Associated Power. But, in any case, the fonner beneficiary of a contract of this
kind shall have the right, within a period of six months after the coming
into force of the present Treaty, to demand from the proprietor of the rights
the grant of a new licence, the conditions of which, in default of agreement
between the parties, shall be fixed by the duly qualified tribunal in the country under whose legislation the rights had been acquired, except in the case

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

205

of licences held in respect of rights acquired under German law. In such cases
the conditions shall be fixed by the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal referred to in
Section VI of this Part. The tribunal may, if necessary, fix also the amount
which it may deem just should be paid by reason of the use of the rights
during the war.
No licence in respect of industrial, literary or artistic property, granted under the special war legislation of any Allied or Associated Power, shall be
affected by the continued existence of any licence entered into before the war,
but shall remain valid and of full effect, and a licence so granted to the former
beneficiary of a licence entered into before the war shall be considered as
substituted for such licence.
Where sums have been paid during the war by virtue of a licence or agreement concluded before the war in respect of rights of industrial property or
for the reproduction or the representation of literary, dramatic or artistic
works, these sums shall be dealt with in the same manner as other debts or
credits of German nationals, as provided by the present Treaty.
This Article shall not apply as between the United States of America on
the one hand and Germany on the other.
ARTICLE

311

The inhabitants of territories separated from Germany by virtue of the
present Treaty shall, notwithstanding this separation and the change of nationality consequent thereon, continue to enjoy in Germany all the rights in
industrial, literary and artistic property to which they were entitled under
German legislation at the time of the separation.
Rights of industrial, literary and artistic property which are in force in
the territories separated from Germany under the present Treaty at the moment of the separation of these territories from Germany, or which will be
re-established or restored in accordance with the provisions of Article 306 of
the present Treaty, shall be recognized by the State to which the said territory is transferred and shall remain in force in that territory for the same
period of time given them under the German law.
SECTION VIII

Social and State Insurance in Ceded Territory
ARTICLE

312

Without prejudice to the provisions contained in other Articles of the
present Treaty, the German Government undertakes to transfer to any
Power to which German territory in Europe is ceded, and to any Power administering former German territory as a mandatory under Article 22 of
Part I (League of Nations), such portion of the reserves accumulated by the
Government of the German Empire or of German States, or by public or

206

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

private organisations under their control, as is attributable to the carrying
on of Social or State Insurance in such territory.
The Powers to which these funds are transferred must apply them to the
performance of the obligations arising from such insurances.
The conditions of the transfer will be determined by special conventions
to be concluded between the German Government and the Governments
concerned.
In case these special conventions are not concluded in accordance with
the above paragraph within three months after the coming into force of
the present Treaty, the conditions of transfer shall in each case be referred to
a Commission of five members, one of whom shall be appointed by the
German Government, one by the other interested Government and three by
the Governing Body of the International Labour Office from the nationals
of other States. This Commission shall by majority vote within three months
after appointment adopt recommendations for submission to the Council of
the League of Nations, and the decisions of the Council shall forthwith be
accepted as final by Germany and the other Government concerned.
PART XI
AERIAL NAVIGATION
ARTICLE

313

The aircraft of the Allied and Associated Powers shall have full liberty of
passage and landing over and in the territory and territorial waters of Germany, and shall enjoy the same privileges as German aircraft, particularly·
in case of distress by land or sea.
ARTICLE

314

The aircraft of the Allied and Associated Powers shall, while in transit to
any foreign country whatever, enjoy the right of flying over the territory
and territorial waters of Germany without landing, subject always to any
regulations which may be made by Germany, and which shall be applicable
equally to the aircraft of Germany and to those of the Allied and Associated
countries.
ARTICLE 315
All aerodromes in Germany open to national public traffic shall be open
for the aircraft of the Allied and Associated Powers, and in any such aerodrome such aircraft shall be treated on a footing of equality with German
aircraft as regards charges of every description, including charges for landing
and accommodation.
ARTICLE 316
Subject to the present provisions, the rights of passage, transit and landing,
provided for in Articles 313,314 and 315, are subject to the observance of

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

207

such regulations as Germany may consider it necessary to enact, but such
regulations shall be applied without distinction to German aircraft and to
those of the Allied and Associated countries.
ARTICLE

317

Certificates of nationality, airworthiness, or competency, and licences, issued or recognised as valid by any of the Allied or Associated Powers, shall
be recognised in Germany as valid and as equivalent to the certificates and
licences issued by Germany.
ARTICLE 318
As regards internal commercial air traffic, the aircraft of the Allied and
Associated Powers shall enjoy in Germany most favoured nation treatment.
ARTICLE

319

Germany undertakes to enforce the necessary measures to ensure that all
German aircraft flying over her territory shall comply with the Rules as to
lights and signals, Rules of the Air and Rules for Air Traffic on and in the
neighbourhood of aerodromes, which have been laid down in the Convention relative to Aerial Navigation concluded between the Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

320

The obligations imposed by the preceding provisions shall remain in force
until January 1, 1923, unless before that date Germany shall have been
admitted into the League of Nations or shall have been authorised, by consent of the Allied and Associated Powers, to adhere to the Convention
relative to Aerial Navigation concluded between those Powers.
PART XII
PORTS, WATERWAYS AND RAILWAYS
SECTION

I

General Provisions
ARTICLE

321

Germany undertakes to grant freedom of transit through her terrItOrIes
on the routes most convenient for international transit, either by rail, navigable waterway, or canal, to persons,goods, vessels, carriages, wagons and
mails corning from or going to the territories of any of the Allied and Associated Powers (whether contiguous or not) ; for this purpose the crossing of
territorial waters shall be allowed. Such persons, goods, vessels, carriages,
wagons and mails shall not be subjected to any transit duty or to any undue
delays or restrictions, and shall be entitled in Germany to national treatment
as regards charges, facilities. and all other matters.

208

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Goods in transit shall be exempt from all Customs or other similar duties.
All charges imposed on transport in transit shall be reasonable, having
regard to the conditions of the traffic. No charge, facility or restriction shall
depend directly or indirectly on the ownership or on the nationality of the
ship or other means of transport on which any part of the through journey
has been, or is to be, accomplished.
ARTICLE

322

Germany undertakes neither to impose nor to maintain any control over
transmigration traffic through her territories beyond measures necessary
to ensure that passengers are bona fide in transit; nor to allow any shipping
company or any other private body, corporation or person interested in the
traffic to take any part whatever in, or to exercise any direct or indirect
influence over, any administrative service that may be necessary for this
purpose.
ARTICLE 323
Germany undertakes to make no discrimination or preference, direct or
indirect, in the duties, charges and prohibitions relating to importations
into or exportations from her territories, or, subject to the special engagements contained in the present Treaty, in the charges and conditions of
transport of goods or persons entering or leaving her territories, based on
the frontier crossed; or on the kind, ownership or flag of the means of transport (including aircraft) employed; or on the original or immediate place
of departure of the vessel, wagon or aircraft of other means of transport
employed, or its ultimate or intermediate destination; or on the route of or
places of trans-shipment on the journey; or on whether any port through
which the goods are imported or exported is a German port or a port
belonging to any foreign country or on whether the goods are imported or
exported by sea, by land or by air.
Germany particularly undertakes not to establish against the ports and
vessels of any of the Allied and Associated Powers any surtax or any direct
or indirect bounty for export or import by German ports or vessels, or by
those of another Power, for example by means of combined tariffs. She further
undertakes that persons or goods passing through a port or using a vessel of
any of the Allied and Associated Powers shall not be subjected to any formality or delay whatever to which such persons ~r goods would not be subjected if they passed through a German port or a port of any other Power,
or used a German vessel or a vessel of any other Power.
ARTICLE

324

All necessary administrative and technical measures shall be taken to
shorten, as much as possible, the transmission of goods across the German
frontiers and to ensure their forwarding and transport from such frontiers,

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

209

irrespective of whether such goods are coming from or going to the territories
of the Allied and Associated Powers or are in transit from or to those territories, under the same material conditions in such matters as rapidity of
carriage and care en route as are enjoyed by other goods of the same kind
carried on German territory under similar conditions of transport.
In particular, the transport of perishable goods shall be promptly and
regularly carried out, and the customs formalities shall be effected in such
a way as to allow the goods to be carried straight through by trains which
make connection.
ARTICLE 325
The seaports of the Allied and Associated Powers are entitled to all favours
and to all reduced tariffs granted on German railways or navigable waterways for the b.enefit of German ports or of any port of another Power.
ARTICLE

326

Germany may not refuse to participate in the tariffs or combinations of
tariffs intended to secure for ports of any of the Allied and Associated Powers
advantages similar to those granted by Germany to her own ports or the ports
of any other Power.
SECTION II

Navigation
CHAPTER

I

FREEDOM OF NAVIGATION
ARTICLE

327

The nationals of any of the Allied and Associated Powers as well as their
vessels and property shall enjoy in all German ports and on the inland navigation routes of Germany the same treatment in all respects as German nationals, vessels and property.
In particular the vessels of anyone of the Allied or Associated Powers shall
be entitled to transport goods of any description, and passengers, to or from
any ports or places in German territory to which German vessels may have
access, under conditions which shall not be more onerous than those applied
in the case of national vessels; they shall be treated on a footing of equality
with national vessels as regards port and harbour facilities and charges of
every description, including facilities for stationing, loading and unloading,
and duties and charges of tonnage, harbour, pilotage, lighthouse, quarantine,
and all analogous duties and charges of whatsoever nature, levied in the name
of or for the profit of the Government, public functionaries, private individuals, corporations or establishments of any kind.

210

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

In the event of Germany granting a preferential regime to any of the Allied
or Associated Powers or to any other foreign Power, this regime shall be
extended immediately and unconditionally to all the Allied and Associated
Powers.
There shall be no impediment to the movement of persons or vessels other
than those arising from prescriptions concerning customs, police, sanitation,
emigration and immigration, and those relating to the import and export
of prohibited goods. Such regulations must be reasonable and uniform and
must not impede traffic unnecessarily.
CHAPTER

II

FREE ZONES IN PORTS
ARTICLE

328

The free zones existing in German ports on August 1, 1914, shall be
maintained. These free zones, and any other free zones which may be established in German territory by the present Treaty, shall be subject to
the regime provided for in the following Articles.
Goods entering or leaving a free zone shall not be subjected to any import
or export duty, other than those provided for in Article 330.
Vessels and goods entering a free zone may be subjected to the charges
established to cover expenses of administration, upkeep and improvement
of the port, as well as to the charges for the use of various installations, provided that these charges shall be reasonable having regard to the expenditure
incurred, and shall be levied in the conditions of equality provided for in
Article 327.
Goods shall not be subjected to any other charge except a statistical duty
which shall not exceed 1 per mille ad valorem, and which shall be devoted
exclusively to defraying the expenses of compiling statements of the traffic
in the port.
ARTICLE 329
The facilities granted for the erection of warehouses, for packing and for
unpacking goods, shall be in accordance with trade requirements for the
time being. All goods allowed to be consumed in the free zone shall be exempt
from duty, whether of excise or of any other description, apart from the statistical duty provided for in Article 328 above.
There shall be no discrimination in regard to any of the provisions of the
present Article between persons belonging to different nationalities or between
goods of different origin or destination.
ARTICLE

330

Import duties may be levied on goods leaving the free zone for consumption in the country on the territory of which the port is situated. Conversely,

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

211

export duties may be levied on goods coming from such country and brought
into the free zone. These import and export duties shall be levied on the same
basis and at the same rates as similar duties levied at the other Customs
frontiers of the country concerned. On the other hand, Germany shall not
levy, under any denomination, any import, export or transit duty on goods
carried by land or water across her territory to or from the free zone from
or to any other State.
Germany shall draw up the necessary regulations to secure and guarantee
such freedom of transit over such railways and waterways in her territory
as normally give access to the free zone.
CHAPTER

III

CLAUSES RELATING TO THE El;BE, THE ODER, THE NIEMEN (RUSSSTROMMEMEL-NIEMEN) AND THE DANUBE

(I) General Clauses
ARTICLE

331

The following rivers are declared international:
the Elbe (Labe) from its confluence with the Vltava (Moldau) , and the
Vltava (Moldau) from Prague;
the Oder (Odra) from its confluence with the Oppa;
the Niemen (Russstrom-Memel-Niemen) from Grodno;
the Danube from VIm;
and all navigable parts of these river systems which naturally provide more
than one State with access to the sea, with or without transhipment from
one vessel to another; together with lateral canals and channels constructed
either to duplicate or to improve naturally navigable sections of the specified
river systems, or to connect two naturally navigable sections of the same river.
The same shall apply to the Rhine-Danube navigable waterway, should
such a waterway be constructed under the conditions laid down in Article
353.
ARTICLE 332
On the waterways declared to be international in the preceding Article,
the nationals, property and flags of all Powers shall be treated on a footing
of perfect equality, no distinction being made to the detriment of the nationals, property or flag of any Power between them and the nationals, property or flag of the riparian State itself or of the most favoured nation.
Nevertheless, German vessels shall not be entitled to carry passengers or
goods by regular services between the ports of any Allied or Associated Power,
without special authority from such Power.

212

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

333

Where such charges are not precluded by any existing conventions, charges
varying on different sections of a river may be levied on vessels using the
navigable channels or their approaches, provided that they are intended solely
to cover equitably the cost of maintaining in a navigable condition, or of
improving, the river and its approaches, or to meet expenditure incurred in
the interests of navigation. The schedule of such charges shall be calculated
on the basis of such expenditure and shall be posted up in the ports. These
charges shall be levied in such a manner as to render any detailed examination
of cargoes unnecessary, except in cases of suspected fraud or contravention.
ARTICLE

334

The transit of vessels, passengers and goods on these waterways shall be
effected in accordance with the general conditions prescribed for transit in
Section I above.
When the two banks of an international river are within the same State
goods in transit may be placed under seal or in the custody of customs agents.
When the river forms a frontier goods and passengers in transit shall be exempt from all customs formalities; the loading and unloading of goods, and
the embarkation and disembarkation of passengers, shall only take place in
the ports specified by the riparian State.
ARTICLE

335

No dues of any kind other than those provided for in the present Part
shall be levied along the course or at the mouth of these rivers.
This provision shall not prevent the fixing by the riparian States of customs,
local octroi or consumption duties, or the creation of reasonable and uniform
charges levied in the ports, in accordance with public tariffs, for the use of
cranes, elevators, quays, warehouses, etc.
ARTICLE

336

In default of any special organisation for carrying out the works connected
with the upkeep and improvement of the international portion of a navigable
system, each riparian State shall be bound to take suitable measures to remove
any obstacle or danger to navigation and to ensure the maintenance of good
conditions of navigation.
If a State neglects to comply with this obligation any riparian State, or
any State represented on the International Commission, if there is one,
may appeal to the tribunal instituted for this purpose by the League of
Nations.
ARTICLE 337
The same procedure shall be followed in the case of a riparian State undertaking any works of a nature to impede navigation in the international sec-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

213

tion. The tribunal mentioned in the preceding Article shall be entitled to
enforce the suspension or suppression of such works, making due allowance
in its decisions for all rights in connection with irrigation, water-power, fisheries, and other national interests, which, with the consent of all the riparian
States or of all the States represented on the International Commission, if
there is one, shall be given priority over the requirements of navigation.
Appeal to the tribunal of the League of Nations does not require the suspension of the works.
ARTICLE 338
The regime set out in Articles 332 to 337 above shall be superseded by one
to be laid down in a General Convention drawn up by the Allied and Associated Powers, and approved by the League of Nations, relating to the waterways recognised in such Convention as having an international character. This
Convention shall apply in particular to the whole or part of the abovementioned river systems of the Elbe (Labe), the Oder (Odra), the Niemen
(Russstrom-1I1emel-Niemen) , and the Danube, and such other parts of these
river systems as may be covered by a general definition.
Germany undertakes, in accordance with the provisions of Article 379, to
adhere to the said General Convention as well as to all projects prepared in
accordance with Article 343 below for the revision of existing international
agreements and regulations.
ARTICLE 339
Germany shall cede to the Allied and Associated Powers concerned, within
a maximum period of three months from the date on which notification shall
be given her, a proportion of the tugs and vessels remaining registered in the
ports of the river systems referred to in Article 331 after the deduction of
those surrendered by way of restitution or reparation. Germany shall in the
same way cede material of all kinds necessary to the Allied and Associated
Powers concerned for the utilisation of those river systems.
The number of the tugs and boats, and the amount of the material so
ceded, and their distribution, shall be determined by an arbitrator or
~rbitrators nominated by the United States of America, due regard being
had to the legitimate needs of the parties concerned, and particularly to the
shipping traffic during the five years preceding the war.
All craft so ceded shall be provided with their fittings and gear, shall be
in a good state of repair and in condition to carry goods, and shall be selected
from among those most recently built.
The cessions provided for in the present Article shall entail a credit of
which the total amount, settled in a lump sum by the arbitrator or arbitrators,
shall not in any case exceed the value of the capital expended in the initial
establishment of the material ceded, and shall be set off against the total
sums due from Germany; in consequence, the indemnification of the proprietors shall be a matter for Germany to deal with.

214

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

(2 ) Special Clauses relating to the Elbe, the Oder and the Niemen

(Russstrom-Memel-Niemen)
ARTICLE

340

The Elbe (Labe) shall be placed under the administration of an International Commission which shall comprise:
4
2
1
1
1
1

representatives of the German States bordering on the river;
representatives of the Czecho-Slovak State;
representative of Great Britain;
representative of France;
representative of Italy;
representative of Belgium.

Whatever be the number of members present, each delegation shall
have the right to record a number of votes equal to the number of
representatives allotted to it.
If certain of these representatives cannot be appointed at the time of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, the decisions of the Commission shall
nevertheless be valid.
ARTICLE 341
The Oder (Odra) shall be placed under the administration of an International Commission, which shall comprise:
1
3
1
1
1
1
1

representative of Poland;
representatives of Prussia;
representative of the Czecho-Slovak State;
representative of Great Britain;
representative of France;
representative of Denmark;
representative of Sweden.

If certain of these representatives cannot be appointed at the time of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, the decisions of the Commission
shall nevertheless be valid.
ARTICLE 342

On a request being made to the League of Nations by any riparian State,
the Niemen (Russstrom-Memel-Niemen) shall be placed under the administration of an International Commission, which shall comprise one representative of each riparian State, and three representatives of other States
specified by the League of Nations.
ARTICLE

343

The International Commissions referred to in Articles 340 and 341 shall
meet within three months of the date of the coming into force of the present
Treaty. The International Commission referred to in Article 342 shall meet

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

215

within three months from the date of the request made by a riparian State.
Each of these Commissions shall proceed immediately to prepare a project
for the revision of the existing international agreements and regulations,
drawn up in conformity with the General Convention referred to in Article
338, should such Convention have been already concluded. In the absence of
such Convention, the project for revision shall be in conformity with the
principles of Articles 332 to 337 above.
ARTICLE

344

The projects referred to in the preceding Article shall, inter alia:

(a) designate the headquarters of the International Commission, and prescribe the manner in which its President is to be nominated;
(b) specify the extent of the Commission's powers, particularly in regard
to the execution of works of maintenance, control, and improvement on the
river system, the financial regime, the fixing and collection of charges, and
regulations for navigation;
(c) define the sections of the river or its tributaries to which the international regime shall be applied.
ARTICLE

345

The international agreements and regulations at present governing the
navigation of the Elbe (Labe), the Oder (Odra), and the Niemen
(Russstrom-Memel-Niemen) shall be provisionally maintained in force until
the ratification of the above-mentioned projects. Nevertheless, in all cases
where such agreements and regulations in force are in conflict with the provisions of Articles 332 to 337 above, or of the General Convention to be
concluded, the latter provisions shall prevail.
(3 ) Special Clauses relating to the Danube
ARTICLE

346

The European Commission of the Danube reassumes the powers it possessed before the war. Nevertheless, as a provisional measure, only representatives of Great Britain, France, Italy and Roumania shall constitute this
Commission.
ARTICLE 347
From the point where the competence of the European Commission ceases,
the Danube system referred to in Article 331 shall be placed under the administration of an International Commission composed as follows:
2 representatives of German riparian States;
1 representative of each other riparian State;
1 representative of each non-riparian State represented in the future on
the European Commission of the Danube.

216

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

If certain of these representatives cannot be appointed at the time of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, the decisions of the Commission
shall nevertheless be valid.
ARTICLE 348
The International Commission provided for in the preceding Article shall
meet as soon as possible after the coming into force of the present Treaty,
and shall undertake provisionally the administration of the river in conformity with the provisions of Articles 332 to 337, until such time as a definitive statute regarding the Danube is concluded by the Powers nominated by
the Allied and Associated Powers.
ARTICLE

349

Germany agrees to accept the regime which shall be laid down for the
Danube by a Conference of the Powers nominated by the Allied and Associated Powers, which shall meet within one year after the coming into force
of the present Treaty, and at which German representatives may be present.
ARTICLE

350

The mandate given by Article 57 of the Treaty of Berlin of July 13,1878, to
Austria-Hungary, and transferred by her to Hungary, to carry out works at
the Iron Gates, is abrogated. The Commission entrusted with the administration of this part of the river shall lay down provisions for the settlement of
accounts subject to the financial provisions of the present Treaty. Charges
which may be necessary shall in no case be levied by Hungary.
ARTICLE

351

Should the Czecho-Slovak State, the Serb-Croat-Slovene State or Roumania, with the authorisation of or under mandate from the International
Commission, undertake maintenance, improvement, weir, or other works on a
part of the river system which forms a frontier, these States shall enjoy on the
opposite bank, and also on the part of the bed which is outside their territory,
all necessary facilities for the survey, execution and maintenance of such
works.
ARTICLE 352
Germany shall be obliged to make to the European Commission of the
Danube all restitutions, reparations and indemnities for damages inflicted on
the Commission during the war.
ARTICLE

353

Should a deep-draught Rhine-Danube navigable waterway be constructed,
Germany undertakes to apply thereto the regime prescribed in Articles 332
to 338.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
CHAPTER

217

IV

CLAUSES RELATING TO THE RHINE AND THE MOSELLE
ARTICLE

354

As from the coming into force of the present Treaty, the Convention of
Mannheim of October 17, 1868, together with the Final Protocol thereof,
shall continue to govern navigation on the Rhine, subject to the conditions
hereinafter laid down.
In the event of any provisions of the said Convention being in conflict with
those laid down by the General Convention referred to in Article 338 (which
shall apply to the Rhine) the provisions of the General Convention shall
prevail.
Within a maximum period of six months from the coming into force of
the present Treaty, the Central Commission referred to in Article 355 shall
meet to draw up a project of revision of the Convention of Mannheim. This
project shall be drawn up in harmony with the provisions of the General
Convention referred to above, should this have been concluded by that time,
and shall be submitted to the Powers represented on the Central Commission.
Germany hereby agrees to adhere to the project so drawn up.
Further, the modifications set out in the following Articles shall immediately be made in the Convention of Mannheim.
The Allied and Associated Powers reserve to themselves the rightto arrive
at an understanding in this connection with Holland, and Germany hereby
agrees to acceed if required to any such understanding.
ARTICLE

355

The Central Commission provided for in the Convention of Mannheim
shall consist of nineteen members, viz.:
2
2
4
4

representatives of the Netherlands;
representatives of Switzerland;
representatives of German riparian States;
representatives of France, which in addition shall appoint the President
of the Commission;
2 representatives of Great Britain;
2 representatives of Italy;
2 representatives of Belgium.

The headquarters of the Central Commission shall be at Strasburg.
Whatever be the number of members present, each Delegation shall have
the right to record a number of votes equal to the number of representatives
.
allotted to it.
If certain of these representatives cannot be appointed at the time of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, the decisions of the Commission shall'
nevertheless be valid.
' ..
219-916--69~15

218

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
ARTICLE

356

Vessels of all nations, and their cargoes, shall have the same rights and
privileges as those which are granted to vessels belonging to the Rhine navigation, and to their cargoes.
None of the provisions contained in Articles 15 to 20 and 26 of the abovementioned Convention of Mannheim, in Article 4 of the Final Protocol
thereof, or in later Conventions, shall impede the free navigation of vessels
and crews of all nations on the Rhine and on waterways to which such Conventions apply, subject to compliance with the regulations concerning pilotage and other police measures drawn up by the Central Commission.
The provisions of Article 22 of the Convention of Mannheim and of
Article 5 of the Final Protocol thereof shall be applied only to vessels registered
on the Rhine. The Central Commission shall decide on the steps to be taken to
ensure that other vessels satisfy the conditions of the general regulations
applying to navigation on the Rhine.
ARTICLE

357

Within a maximum period of three months from the date on which notification shall be given Germany shall cede to France tugs and vessels, from among
those remaining registered in German Rhine ports after the deduction of those
surrendered by way of restitution or reparation, or shares in German Rhine
navigation companies.
When vessels and tugs are ceded, such vessels and tugs, together with their
fittings and gear, shall be in good state of repair, shall be in condition to carry
on commercial traffic on the Rhine, and shall be selected from among those
most recently built.
The same procedure shall be followed in the matter of the cession by
Germany to France of:
( 1) the installations, berthing and anchorage accommodation, platforms,
docks, warehouses, plant, etc., which German subjects or German companies owned on August 1, 1914, in the port of Rotterdam, and
(2) the shares or interests which Germany or German nationals possessed
in such installations at the same date.
The amount and specifications of such cessions shall be determined within
one year of the coming into force of the present Treaty by an arbitrator or
arbitrators appointed by the United States of America, due regard being had
to the legitimate needs of the parties concerned.
The cessions provided for in the present Article shall entail a credit of which
the total amount, settled in a lump sum by the arbitrator or arbitrators mentioned above, shall not in any case exceed the value of the capital expended in
the initial establishment of the ceded material and installations, and shall be
set off against the total sums due from Germany; in consequence, the
indemnification of the proprietors shall be a matter for Germany to deal with.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

219

358

Subject to the obligation to comply with the provisions of the Convention
of Mannheim or of the Convention which may be substituted therefor, and to
the stipulations of the present Treaty, France shall have on the whole course
of the Rhine included between the two extreme points of the French frontier:
(a) the right to take water from the Rhine to feed navigation and irrigation canals (constructed or to be constructed) or for any other purpose, and
to execute on the German bank all works necessary for the exercise of this
right;
( b) the exclusive right to the power derived from works of regulation on
the river, subject to the payment to Germany of the value of half the power
actually produced, this payment, which will take into account the cost of the
works necessary for producing the power, being made either in money or in
power and in default of agreement being determined by arbitration. For this
purpose France alone shall have the right to carry out in this part of the river
all works of regulation (weirs or other works) which she may consider necessary for the production of power. Similarly, the right of taking water from the
Rhine is accorded to Belgium to feed the Rhine-Meuse navigable waterway
provided for below.

The exercise of the rights mentione<:t under (a) and (b) of the present
Article shall not interfere with navigability nor reduce the facilities for navigation, either in the bed of the Rhine or in the derivations which may be substituted therefor, nor shall it involve any increase in the tolls formerly levied
under the Convention in force. All proposed schemes shall be laid before the
Central Commission in order that that Commission may assure itself that
these conditions are complied with.
To ensure the proper and faithful execution of the provisions contained in
(a) and (b) above, Germany:
( 1) binds herself not to undertake or to allow the construction of any
lateral canal or any derivation on the right bank of the river opposite the
French frontiers;
(2) recognises the possession by Fiance of the right of support on and
the right of way over all lands situated on the right bank which may be
required in order to survey, to build, and to operate weirs which France, with
the consent of the Central Commission, may subsequently decide to establish.
In accordance with such consent, France shall be entitled to decide upon and
fix the limits of the necessary sites, and she shall be permitted to occupy such
lands after a period of two months after simple notification, subject to the
payment by her to Germany of indemnities of which the total amount shall
be fixed by the Central Commission. Germany shall make it her business to
indemnify the proprietors whose property will be burdened with such servitudes or permanently occupied by the works.

220

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

Should Switzerland so demand, and if the Central Commission approves,
the same rights shall he accorded to Switzerland for the part of the river
forming her frontier with other riparian States;
(3) shall hand over to the French Government, during the month following the coming into force of the present Treaty, all projects, designs, drafts
of concessions and of specifications concerning the regulation of the Rhine
for any purpose whatever which have been drawn up or received by the
Governments of Alsace-Lorraine or of the Grand Duchy of Baden.
ARTICLE

359

Subject to the preceding provisions, no works shall be carried out in the
bed or on either bank of the Rhine where it forms the boundary of France
and Germany without the previous approval of the Central Commission or
of its agents.
ARTICLE 360
France reserves the option of substituting herself as regards the rights and
obligations resulting from agreements arrived at between the Government of
Alsace-Lorraine and the Grand Duchy of Baden concerning the works to be
carried out on the Rhine; she may also denounce such agreements within a
term of five years dating from the coming into force of the present Treaty.
France shall also have the option of causing works to be carried out which
may be recognised as necessary by the Central Commission for the upkeep
or improvement of the navigability of the Rhine above Mannheim.
ARTICLE

361

Should Belgium within a period of 25 years from the coming into force of
the present Treaty decide to create a deep-draught Rhine-Meuse navigable
waterway, in the region of Ruhrort, Germany shall be bound to construct, in
accordance with plans to be communicated to her by the Belgian Government, after agreement with the Central Commission, the portion of this
navigable waterway situated within her territory.
The Belgian Government shall, for this purpose, have the right to carry
out on the ground all necessary surveys.
Should Germany fail to carry out all or part of these works, the Central
Commission shall be entitled to carry them out instead; and, for this purpose,
the Commission may decide upon and fix the limits of the necessary sites and
occupy the ground after a period of two months after simple notification.
subject to the payment of indemnities to be fixed by it and paid by Germany.
This navigable waterway shall be placed under the same administrative
regime as the Rhine itself, and the division of the cost of initial construction,
including the above indemnities, among the States crossed thereby shall be
made by the Central Commission.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

221

362

Germany hereby agrees to offer no objection to any proposals of the
Central Rhine Commission for extending its jurisdiction:
(1) to the Moselle below the Franco-Luxemburg frontier down to the
Rhine, subject to the consent of Luxemburg;
(2) to the Rhine above Basle up to the Lake of Constance, subject to the
consent of Switzerland;
(3) to the lateral canals and channels which may be established either to
duplicate or to improve naturally navigable sections of the Rhine or the
Moselle, or to connect two naturally navigable sections of these rivers, and
also any other parts of the Rhine river system which may be covered by the
General Convention provided for in Article 338 above.
CHAPTER

V

CLAUSES GIVING TO THE CZECHO-SLOVAK STATE THE USE
OF NORTHERN PORTS
ARTICLE

363

In the ports of Hamburg and Stettin Germany shall lease to the CzechoSlovak State, for a period of 99 years, areas which shall be placed under the
general regime of free zones and shall be used for the direct transit of goods
coming from or going to that State.
ARTICLE

364

The delimitation of these areas, and their equipment, their exploitation,
and in general all conditions for their utilisation, including the amount of the
rental, shall he decided by a Commission consisting of one delegate of Germany, one delegate of the Czecho-Slovak State and one delegate of Great
Britain. These conditions shall be susceptible of revision every ten years in the
same manner.
Germany declares in advance that she will adhere to the decisions so
taken.
SECTION III

Railways
CHAPTER

1

CLAUSES RELATING TO INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT
ARTICLE

365

Goods coming from the territories of the Allied and Associated Powers,
and going to Germany, or in transit through Germany from or to the territories of the Allied and Associated Powers, shall enjoy on the German rail-

222

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

ways as regards charges to be collected (rebates and drawbacks being taken
into account), facilities, and all other matters, the most favourable treatment
applied to goods of the same kind carried on any German lines, either in
internal traffic, or for export, import or in transit, under similar conditions
of transport, for example as regards length of route. The same rule shall be
applied, on the request of one or more of the Allied and Associated Powers, to
goods specially designated by such Power or Powers coming from Germany
and going to their territories.
International tariffs established in accordance with the rates referred
to in the preceding paragraph and involving through way-bills shall be established when one of the Allied and Associated Powers shall require it from
Germany.
ARTICLE 366
From the coming into force of the present Treaty the High Contracting
Parties shall renew, in so far as concerns them and under the reserves indicated in the second paragraph of the present Article, the conventions and
arrangements signed at Berne on October 14, 1890, September 20, 1893,
July 16, 1895, June 16, 1898, and September 19, 1906, regarding the transportation of goods by rail.
If within five years from the date of the coming into force of the present
Treaty a new convention for the transportation of passengers, luggage and
goods by rail shall have been concluded to replace the Berne Convention of
October 14, 1890, and the subsequent additions referred to above, this new
convention and the supplementary provisions for international transport by
rail which may be based on it shall bind Germany, even if she shall have refused to take part in the preparation of the convention or to subscribe to it.
Until a new convention shall have been concluded, Germany shall conform
to the provisions of the Berne Convention and the subsequent additions
referred to above, and to the current supplementary provisions.
ARTICLE

367

Germany shall be bound to co-operate in the establishment of through
ticket services (for passengers and their luggage) which shall be required by
any of the Allied and Associated Powers to ensure their communication by
rail with each other and with all other countries by transit across the territories of Germany; in particular Germany shall, for this purpose, accept
trains and carriages coming from the territories of the Allied and Associated
Powers and shall forward them with a speed at least equal to that of her best
long-distance trains on the same lines. The rates applicable to such through
services shall not in any case be higher than the rates collected on German internal services for the same distance, under the same conditions of speed and
,comfort.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

223

The tariffs applicable under the same conditions of speed and comfort
to the transportation of emigrants going to or coming from ports of the
Allied and Associated Powers and using the German railways shall not be
at a higher kilometric rate than the most favourable tariffs (drawbacks and
rebates being taken into account) enjoyed on the said railways by emigrants
going to or coming from any other ports.
ARTICLE

368

Germany shall not apply specially to such through services, or to the transportation of emigrants going to or coming from the ports of the Allied and
Associated Powers, any technical, fiscal or administrative measures, such as
measures of customs examination, general police, sanitary police, and control,
the result of which would be to impede or delay such services.
ARTICLE

369

In case of transport partly by rail and partly by internal navigation, with
or without through way-bill, the preceding Articles shall apply to the part
of the journey performed by rail.
CHAPTER

II

ROLLING-STOCK
ARTICLE

370

Germany undertakes that German wagons shall be fitted with apparatus
allowing:
( 1) of their inclusion in goods trains on the lines of such of the Allied and
Associated Powers as are parties to the Berne Convention of May 15, 1886,
as modified on May 18, 1907, without hampering the action of the continuous brake which may be adopted in such countries within ten years of the
coming into force of the present Treaty, and
(2) of the acceptance of wagons of such countries in all goods trains on
the German lines.
The rolling stock of the Allied and Associated Powers shall enjoy on the
German lines the same treatment as German rolling stock as regards movement, upkeep and repairs.
CHAPTER III
CESSIONS OF RAILWAY LINES
ARTICLE

371

Subject to any special provisions concerning the cession of ports, waterways
and railways situated in the territories over which Germany abandons her
sovereignty, and to the financial conditions relating to the concessionnaires

224

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

and the pensioning of the personnel, the cession of railways will take place
under the following conditions:
( 1) The works and installations of all the railroads shall be handed over
complete and in good condition.
(2) When a railway system possessing its own rolling-stock is handed over
in its entirety by Germany to one of the Allied and Associated Powers, such
stock shall be handed over complete, in accordance with the last inventory
before November 11, 1918, and in a normal state of upkeep.
(3) As regards lines without any special rolling-stock, Commissions of
experts designated by the Allied and Associated Powers, on which Germany
shall be represented, shall fix the proportion of the stock existing on the
system to which those lines belong to be handed over. These Commissions
shall have regard to the amount of the material registered on these lines in
the last inventory before November 11, 1918, the length of track (sidings
included), and the nature and amount of the traffic. These Commissions
shall also specify the locomotives, carriages and wagons to be handed over
in each case; they shall decide upon the conditions of their acceptance, and
shall make the provisional arrangements necessary to ensure their repair in
German workshops.
(4) Stocks of stores, fittings and plant shall be handed over under the same
conditions as the rolling-stock.
The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 above shall be applied to the lines
of former Russian Poland converted by Germany to the German gauge, such
lines being regarded as detached from the Prussian State System.
CHAPTER

IV

PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN RAILWAY LINES
ARTICLE

372

When as a result of the fixing of new frontiers a railway connection between two parts of the same country crosses another country, or a branch
line from one country has its terminus in another, the conditions of working,
if not specifically provided for in the present Treaty, shall be laid down in a
convention between the railway administrations concerned. If the administrations cannot come to an agreement as to the terms of such convention,
the points of difference shall be decided by commissions of experts composed
as provided in the preceding Article.
ARTICLE

373

Within a period of five years from the coming into force of the present
Treaty the Czecho-Slovak State may require the construction of a railway
line in German territory between the stations of Schlauney and Nachod. The
cost of construction shall be borne by the Czecho-Slovak State.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

225

374

Germany undertakes to accept, within ten years of the coming into force
of the present Treaty, on request being made by the Swiss Government after
agreement with the Italian Government, the denunciation of the International Convention of October 13, 1909, relative to the St. Gothard railway.
In the absence of agreement as to the conditions of such denunciation, Germany hereby agrees to accept the decision of an arbitrator designated by the
United States of America.
CHAPTER V
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE

375

Germany shall carry out the instructions given her, in regard to transport,
by an authorised body acting on behalf of the Allied and Associated Powers:
(1) For the carriage of troops under the provisions of the present Treaty,
and of material, ammunition and supplies for army use;
(2) As a temporary measure, for the transportation of supplies for certain regions, as well as for the restoration, as rapidly as possible, of the normal
conditions of transport, and for the organisation of postal and telegraphic
services.
SECTION IV

Disputes and Revision of Permanent Clauses
ARTICLE

376

Disputes which may arise between interested Powers with regard to the
interpretation and application of the preceding Articles shall be settled as
provided by the League of Nations.
ARTICLE

377

At any time the League of Nations may recommend the revision of such of
these Articles as relate to a permanent administrative regime.
ARTICLE

378

The stipulations in Articles 321 to 330, 332, 365, and 367 to 369 shall be
subject to revision by the Council of the League of Nations at any time after
five years from the coming into force of the present Treaty.
Failing such revision, no Allied or Associated Power can claim after the
expiration of the above period of five years the benefit of any of the stipulations in the Articles enumerated a:bove on behalf of any portion of its territories in which reciprocity is not accorded in respect of such stipulations.
The period of five years during which reciprocity cannot be demanded may
be prolonged by the Council of the League of Nations.
219-f.HI6-69-16

226

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930
SECTION V

Special Provision
ARTICLE

379

Without prejudice to the special obligations imposed on her by the present
Treaty for the benefit of the Allied and Associated Powers, Germany undertakes to adhere to any General Conventions regarding the international
regime of transit, waterways, ports or railways which may be concluded by
the Allied and Associated Powers, with the approval of the League of Nations, within five years of the coming into force of the present Treaty.
SECTION VI

Clauses Relating to the Kiel Canal
ARTICLE

380

The Kiel Canal and its approaches shall be maintained free and open to
the vessels of commerce and of war of all nations at peace with Germany
on terms of entire equality.
ARTICLE 381
The nationals, property and vessels of all Powers shall, in respect of
charges, facilities, and in all other respects, be treated on a footing of perfect
equality in the use of the Canal, no distinction being made to the detriment
of nationals, property and vessels of any Power between them and the nationals, property and vessels of Germany or of the most favoured nation.
No impediment shall be placed on the movement of persons or vessels
other than those arising out of police, customs, sanitary, emigration or immigration regulations and those relating to the import or export of prohibited
goods. Such regulations must be reasonable and uniform and must not unnecessarily impede traffic.
ARTICLE 382
Only such charges may be levied on vessels using the Canal or its approaches as are intended to cover in an equitable manner the cost of
maintaining in a navigable condition, or of improving, the Canal or its
approaches, or to meet expenses incurred in the interests of navigation. The
schedule of such charges shall be calculated on the basis of such expenses,
and shall be posted up in the ports.
These charges shall be levied in such a manner as to render any detailed
examination of cargoes unnecessary, except in the case of suspected fraud
or contrav~ntion.
ARTICLE 383
Goods in transit may be placed under seal or in the custody of customs
agents; the loading and unloading of goods, and the embarkation and dis-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

227

embarkation of passengers, shall only take place in the ports specified by
Germany.
ARTICLE 384
No charges of any kind other than those provided for in the present Treaty
shall be levied along the course or at the approaches of the Kiel Canal.
ARTICLE

385

Germany shall be bound to take suitable measures to remove any obstacle
or danger to navigation, and to ensure the maintenance of good conditions
of navigation. She shall not undertake any works of a nature to impede
navigation on the Canal or its approaches.
ARTICLE

386

In the event of violation of any of the conditions of Articles 380 to 386,
or of disputes as to the interpretation of these Articles, any interested Power
can appeal to the jurisdiction instituted for the purpose by the League of
Nations.
In order to avoid reference of small questions to the League of Nations,
Germany will establish a local authority at Kiel qualified to deal with disputes
in the first instance and to give satisfaction so far as possible to complaints
which may be presented through the consular representatives of the interested
Powers.
PART XIII
[LABOUR]
The Constitution of the International Labour Organisation

PART XIV

GUARANTEES
SECTION I

Western Europe
ARTICLE

428

As a guarantee for the execution of the present Treaty by Germany, the
German territory situated to the west of the Rhine, together with the bridgeheads, will be occupied by Allied and Associated troops for a period of
fifteen years from the coming into force of.the present Treaty.
.
.. For text, see post, p. 241.

228

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930.
ARTICLE

429

If the conditions of the present Treaty are faithfully carried out by Germany, the occupation referred to in Article 428 will be successively restricted
as follows:

( 1) At the expiration of five years there will be evacuated: the bridgehead of Cologne and the territories north of a line running along the Ruhr,
then along the railway JiiIich, Duren, Euskirchen, Rheinbach, thence along
the road Rheinbach to Sinzig, and reaching the Rhine at the confluence
with the Ahr; the roads, railways and places mentioned above being excluded
from the area evacuated.
(2) At the expiration of ten years there will be evacuated: the bridgehead
of Coblenz and the territories north of a line to be drawn from the intersection
between the· frontiers of Belgium, Germany and Holland, running about
4 kilometres south of Aix-Ia-Chapelle, then to and following the crest
of Forst Gemiind, then east of the railway of the Drft Valley, then along
Blankenheim, Valdorf, Dreis, Dlmen to and following the Moselle from
Bremm to Nehren, then passing by Kappel and Simmern, then following
the ridge of the heights between Simmern and the Rhine and reaching this
river at Bacharach; all the places, valleys, roads and railways mentioned
above being excluded from the area evacuated.
(3) At the expiration of fifteen years there will be evacuated: the bridgehead of Mainz, the bridgehead of Kehl and the remainder of the German
territory under occupation.
If at that date the guarantees against unprovoked aggression by Germany
are not considered sufficient by the Allied and Associated Governments, the
evacuation of the occupying troops may be delayed to the extent regarded
as necessary for the purpose of obtaining the required guarantees.
ARTICLE

430

In case either during the occupation or after the expiration of the fifteen
years referred to above the Reparation Commission finds that Germany
refuses to observe the whole or part of her obligations under the present
Treaty with regard to reparation, the whole or part of the areas specified
in Article 429 will be re-occupied immediately by the Allied and Associated
forces.
ARTICLE 431
If before the expiration of the period of fifteen years Germany complies
with all the undertakings resulting from the present Treaty, the occupying
forces will be withdrawn immediately.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
ARTICLE

229

432

All matters relating to the occupation and not provided for by the present
Treaty shall be regulated by subsequent agreements, which Germany hereby
undertakes to observe.
SECTION II

Eastern Europe
ARTICLE

433

As a guarantee for the execution of the provisions of the present Treaty,
by which Germany accepts definitely the abrogation of the Brest-Litovsk
Treaty, and of all treaties, conventions and agreements entered into by her
with the Maximalist Government in Russia, and in order to ensl;lre the
restoration of peace and good government in the Baltic Provinces aI!-d Lithuania, all German troops at present in the said territories shall return to within
the frontiers of Germany as soon as the Governments of the Principal Allied
and Associated Powers shall think the moment suitable, having regard to
the internal situation of these territories. These troops shall abstain from all
requisitions and seizures and from any other coercive measures, with a view
to obtaining supplies intended for Germany, and shall in no way interfere
with such measures for national defence as may be adopted by the Provisional
Governments of Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
No other German troops shall, pending the evacuation or after the evacuation is complete, be admitted to the said territories.
PART XV
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE

434

Germany undertakes to recognise the full force of the Treaties of Peace
and Additional Conventions which may be concluded by the Allied and Associated Powers with the Powers who fought on the side of Germany and
to recognise whatever dispositions may be made concerning the territories of
the former Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, of the Kingdom of Bulgaria and
of the Ottoman Empire, and to recognize the new States within their frontiers
as there laid down.
ARTICLE 435
The High Contracting Parties, while they recognize the guarantees stipulated by the Treaties of 1815, and especially by the Act of November 20,
1815, in favour of Switzerland, the said guarantees constituting international
obligations for the maintenance of peace, declare nevertheless that the provisions of these treaties, conventions, declarations and other supplementary
Acts concerning the neutralized zone of Savoy, as laid down in paragraph

230

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

1 of Article 92 of the Final Act of the Congress of Vienna and in paragraph
2 of Article 3 of the Treaty of Paris of November 20, 1815, are no longer
consistent with present conditions. For this reason the High Contracting
Parties take note of the agreement reached between the French Government
and the Swiss Government for the abrogation of the stipulations relating to
this zone which are and remain abrogated.
The High Contracting Parties also agree that the stipulations of the Treaties
of 1815 and of the other supplementary Acts concerning the free zones of
Upper Savoy and the Gex district are no longer consistent with present conditions, and that it is for France and Switzerland to come to an agreement
together with a view to settling between themselves the status of these territories under such conditions as shall be considered suitable by both countries.

ANNEX
I
The Swiss Federal Council has informed the French Government on May
5, 1919, that after examining the provisions of Article 435 in a like spirit of
sincere friendship it has happily reached the conclusion that it was possible
to acquiesce in it under the following conditions and reservations:
( 1) The neutralized zone of Haute-Savoie:
(a) It will be understood that as long as the Federal Chambers have not
ratified the agreement come to between the two Governments concerning
the abrogation of the stipulations in respect of the neutralized zone of Savoy,
nothing will be definitively settled, on one side or the other, in regard to
this subject.
(b) The assent given by the Swiss Government to the abrogation of the
above mentioned stipulations presupposes, in conformity with the text
adopted, the recognition of the guarantees formulated in favour of Switzerland by the Treaties of 1815 and particularly by the Declaration of November 20,1815.
(c) The agreement between the Governments of France and Switzerland
for the abrogation of the above mentioned stipulations will only be considered as valid if the Treaty of Peace contains this Article in its present
wording. In addition the Parties to the Treaty of Peace should endeavour to
obtain the assent of the signatory Powers of the Treaties of 1815 and of the
Declaration of November 20, 1815, which are not signatories of the present
Treaty of Peace.

(2) Free zone of Haute-Savoie and the district of Gex:
(a) The Federal Council makes the most express reservations to the interpretation to be given to the statement mentioned in the last paragraph of
the above Article for insertion in the Treaty of Peace, which provides that
"the stipulations of the Treaties of 1815 and other supplementary acts con-

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

231

cerning the free zones of Haute-Savoie and the Gex district are no longer
consistent with present conditions". The Federal Council would not wish that
its acceptance of the above wording should lead to the conclusion that it
would agree to the suppression of a system intended to give neighbouring
territory the benefit of a special regime which is appropriate to the geographical and economical situation and which has been well tested.
In the opinion of the Federal Council the question is not the modification
of the customs system of the zones as set up by the Treaties mentioned above,
but only the regulation in a manner more appropriate to the economic conditions of the present day of the tenus of the exchange of goods between the
regions in question. The Federal Council has been led to make the preceding
observations by the perusal of the draft Convention concerning the future
constitution of the zones which was annexed to the note of April 26 from
the French Government. While making the above reservations the Federal
Council declares its readiness to examine in the most friendly spirit any
proposals which the French Government may deem it convenient to make
on the subject.
(b) It is conceded that the stipulations of the Treaties of 1815 and other
supplementary acts relative to the free zones will remain in force until a new
arrangement is come to between France and Switzerland to regulate matters
in this territory.
II
The French Government have addressed to the Swiss Government, on
May 18, 1919, the following note in reply to the communication set out in
the preceding paragraph:
In a note dated May 5 the Swiss Legation in Paris was good eno'ugh to
infonu the Government of the French Republic that the Federal Government adhered to the proposed Article to be inserted in the Treaty of Peace
between the Allied and Associated Governments and Genuany.
The French Government have taken note with much pleasure of the agreement thus reached, and, at their request, the proposed Article, which had been
accepted by the Allied and Associated Governments, has been inserted under
No. 435 in the Peace conditions presented to the Genuan Plenipotentiaries.
The Swiss Government, in their note of May 5 on this subject, have expressed various views and reservations.
Concerning the observations relating to the free zones of Haute-Savoie
and the Gex district, the French Government have the honour to obse'rve
that the provisions of the last paragraph of Article 435 are so clear that their
purport cannot be misapprehended, especially where it implies that no
other Power but France and Switzerland will in future be interested in that
question.
The French Government, on their part, are anxious to protect the interests
of the French territories concerned, and, with that object, having their special

232

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

situation in view, they bear in mind the desirability of assuring them a suitable
customs regime and detennining, in a manner better suited to present conditions, the methods of exchanges between these territories and the adjacent
Swiss territories, while taking into account the reciprocal interests of both
regions.
It is understood that this must in no way prejudice the right of France
to adjust her customs line in this region in confonnity with her political
frontier, as is done on the other portions of her territorial boundaries, and
as was done by Switzerland long ago on her own boundaries in this region.
The French Government are pleased to note on this subject in what a
friendly disposition the Swiss Government take this opportunity of declaring
their willingness to consider any French proposal dealing with the system to
be substituted for the present regime of the said free zones, which the French
Government intend to formulate in the same friendly spirit.
Moreover, the French Government have no doubt that the provisional
maintenance of the regime of 1815 as to the free zones referred to in the
above mentioned paragraph of the note from the Swiss Legation of May 5,
whose object is to provide for the passage from the present regime to the
conventional regime, will cause no delay whatsoever in the establishment of
the new situation which has been found necessary by the two Governments.
This remark applies also to the ratification by the Federal Chambers, dealt
with in paragraph 1 (a), of the Swiss note of May 5, under the heading
"Neutralized zone of Haute-Savoie".
ARTICLE

436

The High Contracting Parties declare and place on record that they have
taken note of the Treaty signed by the Government of the French Republic
on July 17, 1918, with His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco defining
the relations between France and the Principality.
ARTICLE

437

The High Contracting Parties agree that, in the absence of a subsequent
agreement to the contrary, the Chairman of any Commission established by
the present Treaty shall in the event of an equality of votes be entitled to a
second vote.
ARTICLE 438
The Allied and Associated Powers agree that where Christian religious
missions were being maintained by Gennan societies or persons in territory
belonging to them, or of which the government is entrusted to them in accordance with the present Treaty, the property which these missions or missionary societies possessed, including that of trading societies whose profits
were devoted to the support of missions, shall continue to be devoted to missionary purposes. In ()rder to ensure the due execution of this undertaking

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

233

the Allied and Associated Governments will hand over such property to
boards of trustees appointed by or approved by the Governments and composed of persons holding the faith of the Mission whose property is involved.
The Allied and Associated Governments, while continuing to maintain
full control as to the individuals by whom the Missions are conducted, will
safeguard the interests of such Missions.
Germany, taking note of the above undertaking, agrees to accept all arrangements made or to be made by the Allied or Associated Government
concerned for carrying on the work of the said missions or trading societies
and waives all claims on their behalf.
ARTICLE

439

Without prejudice to the provisions of the present Treaty, Germany undertakes not to put forward directly or indirectly against any Allied or Associated
Power, signatory of the present Treaty, including those which without having
declared war, have broken off diplomatic relations with the German Empire,
any pecuniary claim based on events which occurred at any time before
the coming into force of the present Treaty.
The present stipulation will bar completely and finally all claims of this
nature, which will be thenceforward extinguished, whoever may be the
parties in interest.
ARTICLE

440

Germany accepts and recognises as valid and binding all decrees and orders
concerning German ships and goods and all orders relating to the payment
of costs made by any Prize Court of any of the Allied or Associated Powers,
and undertakes not to put forward any claim arising out of such decrees or
orders on behalf of any German national.
The Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to examine in such
manner as they may determine all decisions and orders of German Prize
Courts, whether affecting the property rights of nationals of those Powers
or of neutral Powers. Germany agrees to furnish copies of all the documents
constituting the record of the cases, including the decisions and orders made,
and to accept and give effect to the recommendations made after such ex. '
amination of the cases.
The present Treaty, .of which the French and English texts are both
authentic, shall be ratified.
The deposit of ratifications shall be made at Paris as soon as possible.
Powers of which the seat of the Government is outside Europe will be
entitled merely to inform the Government of the French Republic through
their diplomatic representative at Paris that their ratification has been given;
in that case they must transmit the instr~ment of ratification as soon as
possible.
." .

234

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

A first proces-verbal of the deposit of ratifications will be drawn up as soon
as the Treaty has been ratified by Germany on the one hand, and by three
of the Principal Allied and Associated Powers on the other hand.
From the date of this first proces-verbal the Treaty will come into force
between the High Contracting Parties who have ratified it. For the determination of all periods of time provided for in the present Treaty this date
will be the date of the coming into force of the Treaty.
In all other respects the Treaty will enter into force for each Power at the
date of the deposit of its ratification.
The French Government will transmit to all the signatory Powers a
certified copy of the proces-verbaux of the deposit of ratifications.
In faith whereof the above-named Plenipotentiaries have signed the
present Treaty.
Done at Versailles, the twenty-eighth day of June, one thousand nine
hundred and nineteen, in a single copy which will remain deposited in the
archives of the French Republic, and of which authenticated copies will
be transmitted to each of the Signatory Powers.
[For the United States:]
WOODROW WILSON
[SEAL]
ROBERT LANSING
[SEAL]
HENRY WHITE
[SEAL]
E. M. HOUSE
[SEAL]
TASKER H. BLISS
[SEAL]
[For the United Kingdom:]
[SEAL]
D. LLOYD GEORGE
[SEAL]
A. BONAR LAW
[SEAL]
MILNER
[SEAL]
ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR
[SEAL]
GEORGE N. BARNES
(For the Dominion of Canada:]
CHAS. J. DOHERTY
[SEAL]
ARTHUR L. SIFTON
[SEAL]
[For the Commonwealth of Australia:]
W. M. HUGHES
[SEAL]
JOSEPH COOK
[SEAL]
[For the Union of South Africa: ]
LOUIS BOTHA
[SEAL]
J. CHR. SMUTS
[SEAL]

[For Italy:]
SIDNEY SON NINO
IMPERIALI
SILVIO CRESPI

[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For Japan:]
SAION]I
N. MAKINO
S. CHINDA
K. MATSUI
H.IJUIN

[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For Belgiurn :]
HYMANS
J. VAN DEN HEUVEL
EMILE VANDERVELDE

[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For Bolivia: ]
ISMAEL MONTES

[SEAL]

[For Brazil: ]
CALOGERAS
RODRIGO OCTAVIO

[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For China:]

[For the Dominion of New Zealand:]
W. F. MASSEY
[SEAL]

[For Cuba:]
ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE

[SEAL]

[For India:]
ED. S. MONTAGU
GANGA SINGH, MAHARAJA DE
BIKANER

[For Ecuador:]
E. DORN Y DE ALSUA

[SEAL]

[SEAL]

[For France:]
G. CLEMENCEAU
S. PICHON
L. L. KLOTZ
ANDRE TARDIEU
JULES CAMBON

[For Greece:]
ELEFTHERIOS VENISELOS
NICOLAS POLITIS

[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For Guatemala:]
JOAQUIN MENDEZ

[SEAL]

[For Haiti:]
TERTULLIEN GUILBAUD

[SEAL]

[SEAL]

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919
[For the Hedjaz:]
M. RUSTEM HAmAR
ABDUL HADI AOUNI
[For Honduras: ]
P. BONILLA
[For Liberia:]
C. D. B. KING
[For Nicaragua:]
SALVADOR CHAMORRO
[For Panama:]
ANTONIO BURGOS
[For Peru:]
C. G. CANDAMO
[For Poland:]
I. J. PADEREWSKI
ROMAN DMOWSKI
[For Portugal:]
AFFONSO COSTA
AUGUSTO SOARES

[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For Roumania:]
ION I. C. BRATIANO
GENERAL C. COANDA

235
[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes:]
[SEAL]
NIK P. PACHITCH
DR. ANTE TRUMBIC
[SEAL]
MIL. R. VESNITCH
[SEAL]
[For Siam:]
CHAROON
TRAIDOS PRABANDHU

[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[SEAL]

[For the Czecho-Slovak Republic: 1
KAREL KRAMAR
DR. EDWARD BENES
[SEAL]

[SEAL]
[SEAL]

rForUruguay:]
J. A. BUERO

[SEAL]

[SEAL]
[SEAL]

[For Germany:]
HERMANN MULLER
DR. BELL

[SEAL]
[SEAL]

PROTOCOL OF JUNE 28, 1919

With a view to indicating precisely the conditions in which certain provisions of the Treaty of even date are to be carried out, it is agreed by the
High Contracting Parties that:
( 1) A Commission will be appointed by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers to supervise the destruction of the fortifications of Heligoland in accordance with the Treaty. This Commission will be authorized
to decide what portion of the works protecting the coast from sea erosion
are to be maintained and what portion must be destroyed;
(2) Sums reimbursed by Germany to German nationals to indemnify them
in respect of the interests which they may be found to possess in the railways
and mines referred to in the second paragraph of Article 156 shall be credited
to Germany against the sums due by way of reparation;
(3) The list of persons to be handed over to the Allied and Associated
Governments by Germany under the second paragraph of Article 228 shall
be communicated to the German Government within a month from the
coming into force of the Treaty;
(4) The Reparation Commission referred to in Article 240 and paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Annex IV cannot require trade secrets or other confidential information to be divu]ged;
(5) From the signature of the Treaty and within the ensuing four months
Germany will be entitled to submit for examination by the Allied and Associated Powers documents and proposals in order to expedite the work
connected with reparation, and thus to shorten the investigation and to
accelerate the decisions;

236

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

(6) Proceedings will be taken against persons who have committed
punishable offences in the liquidation of German property, and the Allied
and Associated Powers will welcome any information or evidence which the
German Government can furnish on this subject.
Done at Versailles, the twenty-eigthth day of June, one thousand nine
hundred and nineteen.
[For the United States:]
WOODROW WILSON
ROBERT LANSING
HENRY WHITE
E.M.HoUSE
TASKER H. BLISS
[For the United Kingdom:]
D. LLO-ro GEORGE
A. BONAR LAW
MILNER
ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR
GEORGE N. BARNES
[For the Dominion of Canada:]
CHAS. J. DOHERTY
ARTHUR L. SIFTON
[For the Commonwealth of Australia:]
W.M.HuGHES
JOSEPH COOK
[For the Union of South Africa:]
LOUIS BOTHA
J. C. SMUTS
[For the Dominion of New Zealand:]
W. F. MASSEY
[ForIndia :]
ED. S. MONTAGU
GANGA SINGH, MAHARAJA DE
BIKANER
[For France:]
G. CLEMENCEAU
S. PICHON
L. L. KLOTZ
ANDRE TARDIEU
JULES CAMBON
[For Italy:]
SIDNEY SONNINO
IMPERIALI
SILVIO CRESPI
[For Japan:]
SAIONJI
N.MAKINO
S. CHINDA
K. MATSUI
H.IJUIN

[For Belgium:]
HYMANS
J. VAN DEN HEUVEL
EMILE VANDERVELDE
[For Bolivia: ]
ISMAEL MONTES
[For Brazil:]
CALOGERAS
RODRIGO OCTAVIO
[For China:]
[For Cuba:]
ANTONIO S. DE BUSTAMANTE
[For Ecuador:]
E. DORN Y DE ALSUA
[For Greece:]
ELEFTHERIOS VENISELOS
NICOLAS POLITIS
[For Guatemala:]
JOAQUIN MENDEZ
[For Haiti:]
TERTULLIEN GUILBAUD
[For the Hedjaz:]
M. RUSTEM HAIDAR
ABDUL HADI AOUNI
[For Honduras:]
P. BONILLA
[For Liberia:]
C.D.B.KING
[For Nicaragua: ]
SALVADOR CHAMORRO
[For Panama:]
ANTONIO BURGOS
[For Peru:]
C. G. CANDAMO
[For Poland: ]
I. J. PADEREWSKI'
ROMAN DMOWSKI
[For Portugal:]
AFFONSO COSTA
AUGUSTO SOARES

TREATY

[For Roumania: ]
ION I. C. BRATIANO

OF

VERSAILLES-JUNE

28, 1919

237

[For the Czecho-Slovak Republic:]
.

GENERAL C. COANOA

[For the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes:]
NIK P. PAC HITCH
DR. ANTE TRUMBIC
MIL. R. VESNITCH

[For Siam:]

KAREL KRAMAR
DR. EDWARD BENES

[For Uruguay:]

J. A. BUERO
[For Germany:]
HERMANN MULLER

CHAROON
TRAIDOS PRABANOHU

DR. BELL

PROTOCOL SIGNED BY GERMANY JANUARY

10, 1920

At the moment of proceeding to the first deposit of ratifications of the
Treaty of Peace, it is placed on record that the following obligations, which
Germany had undertaken to execute by the Armistice Conventions and supplementary Agreements, have not been executed or have not been completely
fulfilled:
(1) Armistice Convention of November 11,1918/5 Clause VII; obligation to deliver 5,000 locomotives and 150,000 wagons. 42 locomotives and
4,460 wagons are still to be delivered;
(2) Armistice Convention of November 11, 1918, Clause XII; obligation to withdraw the German troops in Russian territory within the frontiers
of Germany, as soon as the' Allies shall think the moment suitable. The withdrawal of these troops has not been effected, despite the reiterated instructions of August 27, September 27 and October 10, 1919;
(3) Armistice Convention of November 11,1918, Clause XIV; obligation to cease at once all requisitions, seizures or coercive measures in Russian
territory. The German troops have continued to have recourse to such
measures;
(4) Armistice Convention of November 11, 1918, Clause XIX; obligation to return immediately all documents, specie, stocks, shares, paper money,
together with plant for the issue thereof, affecting public or private interests
in the invaded countries. The complete lists of specie and securities carried
off, collected or confiscated by the Germans in the invaded countries have
not been supplied;
(5) Armistice Convention of November 11, 1918, Clause XXII; obligation to surrender all German submarines. Destruction of the German
submarine U.C. 48 off Ferrol by order of her German commander, and
destruction in the North Sea of certain submarines proceeding to England
for surrender;
(6) Armistice Convention of November 11, 1918, Clause XXIII; obligation to maintain in Allied ports the German ~arships designated by the Allied
and Associated Powers, these ships being intended to be ultimately handed
45

Ante, p. 9.

238

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

over. Clause XXXI; obligation not to destroy any ship before delivery.
Destruction of the said ships at Scapa Flow on June 21, 1919;
(7) Protocol of December 17, 1918, Annex to the Armistice Convention
of December 13, 1918; obligation to restore the works of art and artistic
documents carried off in France and Belgium. All the works of art removed
into the unoccupied parts of Germany have not been restored;
(8) Armistice Convention of January 16, 1919/6 Clause III and Protocol
392/1 Additional Clause III of July 25, 1919; obligation to hand over agricultural machinery in the place of the supplementary railway material provided for in Tables 1 and 2 annexed to the Protocol of Spa of December 17,
1918. The following machines had not been delivered on the stipulated date
of October 1, 1919. 40 "Heucke" steam plough outfits; all the cultivators
for the outfits; all the spades; 1,500 shovels; 1,130 T.F. 23/26 ploughs; 1,765
T.F. 18/21 ploughs; 1,512 T.F. 23/26 ploughs; 629 T.F. 0 m. 20 Brabant
ploughs; 1,205 T.F.o m. 26 Brabant ploughs; 4,282 harrows of 2 k. 500;
2,157 steel cultivators; 966 2 m. 50 manure distributors; 1,608 3 m. 50
manure distributors;
(9) Armistice Convention of January 16, 1919, Clause VI; obligation
to restore the industrial material carried off from French and Belgian territory. All this material has not been restored;
(10) Convention of January 16,1919, Clause VIII; obligation to place
the German merchant fleet under the control of the Allied and Associated
Powers. A certain number of ships whose delivery had been demanded under
this clause have not yet been handed over;
( 11) Protocols of the Conferences of Brussels of March 13 and 14, 1919;
obligation not to export war material of all kinds. Exportation of aeronautical material to Sweden, Holland and Denmark.
A certain number of the above provisions which have not been executed
or have not been executed in full have been renewed by the Treaty of June 28,
1919, whose coming into force will ipso facto render the sanctions there provided applicable. This applies particularly to the various measures to be taken
on account of reparation.
Further, the question of the evacuation of the Baltic provinces has been the
subject of an exchange of notes and of decisions which are being carried out.
The Allied and Associated Powers expressly confirming the contents of their
notes, Germany by the present Protocol undertakes to continue to execute
them faithfully and strictly.
Finally, as the Allied and Associated Powers could not allow to p'ass without penalty the other failures to execute the Armistice Conventions and violations so serious as the destruction of the German fleet at Scapa Flow, the
destruction of U.C. 48 off Ferrol and the destruction in the North Sea of
.. Ante, p. 24.

TREATY OF VERSAILLES-JUNE 28, 1919

239

certain submarines on their way to England for surrender, Germany
undertakes:
(1) A. To hand over as reparation for the destruction of the German fleet
at Scapa Flow:
. (a) Within 60 days from the date of the signature of the present Protocol
and in the conditions laid down in the second paragraph of Article 185 of
the Treaty of Peace the five following light cruisers:
Konigsberg,
Pillau,
Graudenz,
Regensburg,
Strassburg.

(b) Within 90 days from the date of the signature of the present Protocol,
and in good condition and ready for service in every respect, such a number
of floating docks, floating cranes, tugs and dredgers, equivalent to a total displacement of 400,000 tons, as the Principal Allied and Associated Powers
may require. As regards the docks, the lifting power will be considered as the
displacement. In the number of docks referred to above there will be about
75 per cent. of docks over 10,000 tons. The whole of this material will be
handed over on the spot;
B. To deliver within 10 days from the signature of the present Protocol a
complete list of all floating docks, floating cranes, tugs and dredgers which
are German property. This list, which will be delivered to the Naval InterAllied Commission of Control referred to in Article 209 of the Treaty of
Peace, will specify the material which on November 11, 1918, belonged to
the German Government or in which the German Government had at that
date an important interest;
C. The officers and men who formed the crews of the warships sunk at
Scapa Flow and who are at present detained by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers will, with the exception of those whose surrender is provided
for by Article 228 of the Treaty of Peace, be repatriated at latest when Germany has carried out the provisions of Paragraphs A. and B. above;
D. The destroyer B. 98 will be considered as one of the 42 destroyers whose
delivery is provided for by Article 185 of the Treaty of Peace;
(2) To hand over within 10 days from the signature of the present Protocol the engines and motors of the submarines U. 137 and U. 138 as compensation for the destruction of U.C. 48;
(3) To pay to the Allied and Associated Governments before January 31,
1920, the value of the aeronautical material exported, in accordance with the
decision which will be given and the valuation which will be made and

240

MULTILATERAL AGREEMENTS 1918-1930

notified by the Aeronautical Inter-Allied Commission of Control referred to
in Article 210 of the Treaty of Peace.
In the event of Germany not fulfilling these obligations within the periods
laid down above, the Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to take
all military or other measures of coercion which they may consider
appropriate.
Done at Paris, the tenth day of January, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty, at four o'clock p.m.
[For Germany:]
V. SIMSON
FREIHERR VON LERSNER

